 This is cassette two, side one, continuation with Bert Kallsen, Rockford, Illinois. Cassette two, side one. Did they have any Swedish newspapers? Oh yes. I remember we got Svenska Tribunion, I suppose it was from Chicago at the time. They got the American, Swedish newspapers that were published in America, in Chicago. So that's about the only, I guess, newspaper I remember. You remember Augustana, the Lutheran church paper from... Maybe my wife does, I don't know. So they had a Swedish newspaper every week then. How about organizations now, like Vasa, Swedish Viking, SMS? Yeah, well, I can remember going to a lot of their doings, Vasa, SMNSF. Did they belong to them? Yes, my parents belonged to Vasa. I don't recall if there were any other organizations they belonged to, but we went to a lot of them. The special doings they had. Special parties, picnics, things like this they went to. How about the Depression? You remember that, you were old enough to... Oh yeah. They still had a house then on the... They still had their home. It was, my father always had his job, but it was, I guess he wasn't getting paid very much, they kept him on. But I remember that they had a problem with the mortgage. And then eventually, I think what saved most of the people's homes in Rockford, all the Swedish, the Swedish building and loan. It was the bank. Yeah, it was, well, it's now called Home Federal Savings, but it was Swedish Building and Loan at the time, I guess, that took over and saved a lot of the people that were going under with their mortgages, I guess. There was some Swedes that started that too. Yeah, some Swedes that started it, yeah. P.A. Peters, was he still a strong man when you were a little boy, 10, 15? Yeah. He was turning in though. In fact, I think just about everything in Rockford at that time was controlled, or all the buildings, even the Faust Hotel, wasn't that by a Swede? Yeah, Faust, yes. Yeah, so it was all of the furniture business and machine too, a majority of it, I think, was. But like Söderstrand, they didn't help the workers with the house loans. They were not big enough to do that at that time. No. They still don't. They don't do anything. They still don't do mortgages. No, they were out of their market. So, but your father wasn't laid off then? No. He was lucky enough to hang on. He hung on. I don't know. He must not have gotten paid very much because I know that things were a little bit rough, you know, with money at the time. So, your mother, now, she worked, you said, in the family also before she married, but when she married, she never worked after that? No, she never worked after she got married. It was like a custom then when they got married. Yeah, I think all the Swedish. She had a baby in the first year after they were married also. Yes, I believe my brother was born a year after they got married. And so. How did they take the change now from, you know, Martin from West New York, London, was from a country place and your father came from Tidaholm, of course, that was a city. Yeah. Compared to Rockford, was that more conveniences here, you think? Did they comment about that? More stores here and easier to get everything? Yeah, I believe that it was a lot handier. Of course, at the time, Rockford was a pretty small town, but I think they didn't feel that they were that separated from Sweden because. They had Swedes. I guess at the time in this area of Rockford, the East Side, I believe the biggest percentage was Swedes. In fact, everybody associated with were Swedish. So they had their Swedish organizations so that they they didn't feel that homesick. You know, it isn't as if they just picked up and went to another country where they were, there were no other Swedes. So they are. So they associated with Swedes and a lot of Tidaholm was here. Sure. There were probably hundreds in the 1950s, 1920s. Yeah, there were quite a few. I've seen a picture, a big one. Yeah. It's a big, big group. Yeah. There were probably as many as from Öland. Yeah. Oh, yes. Quite a few of them. Did you associate now with their friends' children? Oh, sure. In fact, all of our friends today are all of, let's say, majority of our friends are all Swedish descent, our parents. Most, all of our friends speak Swedish and understand Swedish. So it's, and we have the Swedish customs. We celebrate Christmas traditionally the Swedish way, you know, with Swedish foods. And even up until, oh, I'd say quite a few years ago, my wife and I, we always went out and on Lucia Day, you know, we'd go out at midnight and Lucia would go on out and sing at Christmas time and Ö. With a group of friends. With a group of friends, yeah. So we did all the traditional Swedish Ö. Did you stand outside the houses then as well? Yeah, we stood outside and sang. I think I played the clarinet at the time and Ö. Were you invited then to the house? Oh, yes, then we came, then we were invited in and we had coffee and cookies and then they went with us to the next house and by five or six in the morning we had quite a group. Some years we did this, some years they had us tape record our songs when we came into the houses. Oh, I see. But Ö What do you remember now from your childhood Christmas? Dad brought home the Christmas tree, how long before Christmas? Well, that was, I don't remember how long before Christmas. It was, it wasn't like it is today, like it was probably the Christmas week, you know, that we probably put up the Christmas tree. And it was a real tree? Oh, yes, it was a real tree. Was it a fir or spruce? It was a fir tree then. I remember the needles, there weren't many needles on when we took it down. And then live candles? Yes, live candles at the time. What kind of ornaments was it dressed with? Oh, we had a lot of carameller, you know, the paper Ö Homemade? Yes, I suppose they were, and there were some ornaments like we have today, we still have some I believe, they're kind of tarnished now, but Ö We have some from his parents. Yes, we still have a few. I see. So Ö Still a few of them. Yes, this was back in the 20s, you know, so we did, they did have Ö You didn't have any flags or Ö from different countries? No, I don't recall that, but Ö I think pictures are there, but we don't Ö But we always celebrated Christmas Eve like all the Swedes do, you know. Christmas Eve was the big day, Christmas Day was, it was all over with as far as we were concerned. You got the gifts then on Christmas Eve? Oh, yeah, we had a big dinner and all of the Ö Well, our group of aunts and uncles came over, you know, we had the traditional Ö Kukekorv, and skinka, bruna bönor, and Ö Doppelgryta Doppelgryta, yeah. Lutfisk Lutfisk, yeah, we had the whole thing Ö So some of the friends came over then, no relation or Ö Yeah, it was aunts and uncles and cousins, so we had a big get together, and then after, after we had our dinner, then Ö It was time, we always were anxious to get the dishes off the table so that Santa Claus could come, you know, so Ö Who was that? I suppose you didn't know Ö It was Ö I guess my father was Santa Claus, I remember Ö He dressed up then as Ö Yeah, oh yeah, he had the Santa Claus Ö One time I remember that Santa Claus had the same collar as my father wore, so I thought that was unusual, but Ö So you Ö You thought your father was pretty up to date? Yeah Ö And then was Juletan, Christmas morning? Yeah, Juletan, Christmas morning, yeah, it was Ö And you all went to church then? Yeah, we all went to church on Christmas morning for Juletan, that was Ö What time was Juletan then, about five or six in the morning? Six Ö Yeah Ö And it was in Swedish then when you were young Ö Yes, oh yes, it was in Swedish, up until how many years ago before Ö well, we just, just very Ö Ten Ö fifteen Ö We had Swedish sermons up until Ö Swedish Ö Well, that wasn't you, Lothar, though Ö No Ö Not too many years ago, we had Swedish Ö Every Sunday Ö Sermons on Ö you know Ö So Ö Well, they still do in some churches in town, I believe Ö What about the Salvation Army? Salvation Army still has, in fact, I believe you can pick it up on the radio, Swedish service Ö Did you go to the Salvation Army at Ö No Ö Your parents at that time? No, we went to Zion Lutheran Church Ö And they went to the Lutheran Church, yeah Ö And Ö And the Christmas tree was there up Ö for how many weeks then? Did you throw it out before New Year's or Ö No, I guess it was after Ö Always after Ö After New Year's that Ö well, I don't know if we Ö by that time, what was it, Schubert the Dog Knut? Isn't that what it's supposed to be? Yeah Ö There wasn't much left on the tree, I guess we tried to keep it up until then Ö And then Ö Candles now, were they lit Ö Only Ö On Ö Christmas Eve Ö Christmas Eve, yeah, it was kind of dangerous to have candles on the trees Ö But they did light them at Ö on Christmas Eve, and then Ö I think that's one of my earliest recollections of candles, and then I suppose Ö In about the mid Ö or late 20s Ö That's when electric lights came in Ö Everybody had electric lights then on the trees Ö But I do remember candles on the trees Ö So there was the early Christmases in Ö in Rockford Ö How about politics now? Your dad Ö Was he interested in Ö Never really involved in it that much Ö I guess Ö Was he running for an office or alderman or Ö No, not really Ö He was too busy, he worked at Sunstrands and he was there Ö It seems like Ö He put in more time Ö He'd come home for supper at night and he'd usually have to go back again Ö He was very dedicated to his job Ö So he put in a lot of hours there Ö And that's about all he had time for Ö So he never discussed politics in any Ö No, not in my family Ö Not that much Ö It was a secondary interest Ö Right Ö So Ö How about your feeling of Sunstrand Ö You came in in the same Ö Kind of line of work so to speak Ö Well you got more sophisticated of an education as an engineer Ö Yes Ö Knowledge and so on Ö Did you feel the same dedication for the company as your dad you think? I did, yes Ö I put in a lot of time when I Ö I don't know if it's that way anymore Ö It seems like people aren't as dedicated as they were Ö I guess I'm from the old school Ö And even though Ö When I got up in engineering I did not Ö I got on salary where I didn't have to punch in on the time clock Ö But I remember a lot of times working almost around the clock Ö Working up there till after midnight and Ö Going in at three or four in the morning again working and Ö So Ö You know this is I guess what you call dedication to your work Ö Would they work with Ö All the workers you think this Ö Like an honor system Ö Without using the time clock Ö If you have two thousand workers Ö Well Ö They wouldn't work Ö Not anymore Ö So this is a different fiber Ö Yeah Ö It's Ö I guess it's a different era today than it was when we grew up Ö Times have changed Ö So nowadays everybody is always wondering and Ö Bickering about the management and the factory Ö The owners in other words are making too much money Ö Did you think about the effect when you went to work that Ö This company is making a heck of a lot of money here Ö And you try to Ö Slide through the day so to speak Ö Because you are not getting paid more than Ö If you are working your butt off Ö Well I never thought about that the owners were making more Ö I guess I figured they deserved it but Ö But your father was one of the owners Ö He was a stockholder Ö Yeah he was a stockholder Ö He bought in stocks then Ö Yes he was a stockholder but Ö I know that I always Ö Felt I should get paid more because at those times Ö I started out working at Ö Probably I got 40 cents an hour when I started working Ö And I can remember Ö That was a lot of money compared to when my brother Ö Got out of school and started working Ö He started out at Ö 10 cents an hour I believe and I can remember Ö The neighbor boy next door graduated at the same time Ö He only got a job for 8 cents an hour so he thought Ö He was jealous of my brother because he was getting 10 cents an hour Ö What kind of work Ö Working in a machine tool Ö But not the sun strands then Ö Sure Ö Yes my brother started sun strands I forget where Ö Lundberg Ö How come you said you were 40 cents Ö Well this was right after NRA came in Ö It was Ö See in 1938 they had Ö The National Recovery Act Ö Yeah and the minimum wage was 40 cents an hour then Ö So I started out at 40 cents an hour Ö It was 4 years later I said Ö What Ö You started Ö Yeah it was 4 years later Ö So you were born at the right time at the right place Ö Right yeah Ö In the right factory Ö But his brother is now a wealthy man and he isnít Ö My brother is still working he is 70 years old Ö And he is a director of engineering Ö At sun strands? No at another company Ö And he is Ö What you call Ö Ö also Ö He is their inventor Ö So Ö But he enjoys Ö He is a little bit like Gunnar Wallmark Ö He enjoys his work Ö He thinks it is a lot of fun to do this so he just works Ö It is more fun than being retired I guess Ö How did he feel about starting out at 10 cents an hour though Ö Well in those days he was happy to have a job Ö 10 cents an hour Ö When you came in though and came home with 40 cents Ö Well of course then he was probably making 60 cents an hour see Ö He was making 4 dollars an hour Ö No but in 1938 Ö Well when I was making 40 cents an hour Ö I started in 1938 by 1940 I was Ö Had all nice clothing and I bought myself a Buick convertible Ö Brand new Ö Well it was Ö No it was Ö In 1940 I bought a 38 Buick convertible 2 years old Ö I mean it was a nice Buick convertible coupe with twin side mounts and Ö Red leather upholstery and a rumble seat so Ö You know Ö From your own earnings Ö From 40 cents an hour see in those days he didnít Ö A dollar went a lot further Ö You didnít make cash for it Ö No I bought it on installment sure but Ö Your money went a lot further Ö It is all more or less relative now that Ö Now you are not much further ahead but you are just handling more money thatís all Ö But you didnít buy more than you needed or Ö Oh no Ö You needed a car with a rumble seat Ö Thatís it Ö I think the only thing I ever bought on installment plan was my car Ö I donít remember anything else and after that after we got married we never Ö Bought anything until we could afford to pay for it cash so Ö So you got more restrictive after you got married Ö No I wouldnít say that Ö It was more or lessÖ Well okay Ö No we Ö We never lived beyond our means Ö His wife Ö If we couldnít afford it we didnít buy it Ö We waited until we could afford it to buy it Ö So Ö So you got married in Ö What year? 19 Ö 1942 Ö 1942 Ö 1942 Ö December 19th Ö And how did you meet now? I can ask her later on but I ask you first Ö Maybe you have different ideas Ö Well we went to the same church Ö That wasnít it at all Ö Okay but we had known of each other I suppose for Ö I think I better hand the mic over to Adeline now Ö You still donít Ö No I was a friend of your sisters Ö Yes she was a friend of my sisters yes and Ö Okay should I go into the convertible Ö No Ö Okay Ö I mean I knew you Ö Yes she Ö We knew each other but Ö And you had a nice car Ö Yes that Ö I guess I picked her up one night downtown Ö Her and her girlfriend Ö Driving by and I saw her Ö It must have made a difference though because Ö People came out of the 30ís Ö Really staggering I suppose Ö Yes Ö And there was not too many they could buy a car Ö Even 1940 Ö But I was going with nice guys Ö I mean guys that had cars but Ö I had known him he had gone to our church Ö And how did we Ö Our first date Ö And I had gone to his home and I had met him Ö I was not impressed Ö You know Ö So we Ö I asked him to a steak fry and he went with me Ö We didnít go out again for four months and Ö You never showed up again Ö No I didnít ask him I wasnít interested Ö I had other people to go out with Ö I was going with a pre-law and a pre-med Ö I donít know Ö Well you got married in 1942 Ö And that was during the war Ö Yes Ö And then you were drafted Ö I Ö Well I was getting deferments and Ö More and more of my friends were going into the service Ö So I finally volunteered for induction Ö I couldnít Ö They wanted me to stay and work at Sun Strands Ö But I felt like I Ö Well I just felt like I should go into the service Ö So I volunteered for induction in 1940 Ö April of 44 I believe it was I went in Ö So Ö You went overseas then Ö Yes Ö I went over in Italy at the time Ö You volunteered for the ski troops Ö Yes I volunteered and I wanted to get into ski troops and Ö Ski troops Ö Yes at the time I wanted Ö We used to ski Ö I loved to ski Ö So Ö At the time the 10th Mountain Division had already left Ö And gone overseas Ö So I was an infantry rifleman until I got over into Italy Ö And over there I volunteered to get into the ski troops Ö So I got into the ski troops over in Italy Ö And of course the war was over in 1945 Ö July I guess I Ö May it was over but July of 45 I shipped home Ö And I was going to go over to Japan Ö And during my overseas furlough the war was over there too Ö So I Ö I stayed in the army until I was discharged Ö May of 46 Ö Yes May of 46 Ö So you came back without a scratch then Ö Oh yes Ö How about your brother was he also Ö No he didnít go in Ö He was Ö A little higher up in Ö Sun strands a little more Ö What do I say Ö Chief engineer Ö Chief engineer at the time yes Ö So that they couldnít afford to let him go Ö So were you married then Ö Did you rent an apartment then or how did you Ö Well we rented a little bungalow Ö A little house at the time Ö And Ö A new little house in the army of course Ö Yes Ö And I remember the first year Ö 1942 it was a winter Ö It snowed I think every day Ö And of course we had gas rationing at the time because of the war Ö And we got Ö I forget what it was four gallons Ö Three gallons a week Ö And we saved that because we lived a little bit outside of town Ö We saved that for our shopping on Saturday Ö So I would ski to work every morning Ö All winter long I would just put on my skis and ski to work and Ö In the summer time I got a bicycle and Ö Bicycle to work Ö Was that your dad that got you into skiing or Ö No I just took it up by myself Ö Did you play soccer Ö No I didnít play soccer Ö Basketball I guess Ö Oh yeah I belonged to a Swedish gym Ö I did weight lifting and Ö And tumbling and Ö Swedish gym troop Ö So for quite a few years Ö So there were a lot of people interested in Ö There was a lingy gymnastic Ö Who was the leader at that time when you Ö In your thirties Ö Erik Johnson was Ö Heís a Tida Holmberg Ö And he passed away here last year Ö So Ö He was the director or leader of the Ö Of the gym troop Ö But Ö How many were you then at your time Ö There were quite a few Ö I donít recall the exact number Ö What would be Ö Thirty Ö Thirty or forty I suppose in the whole gym Ö Did you register every week Ö I was more Ö I did more weight lifting and Ö Workouts than in the tumbling Ö So Ö My brother was Ö On the tumbling team I believe Ö The Ö And they put on a show once Ö A year I guess Ö How often did you practice down Ö Oh I went down there Ö Several times during the week Ö Maybe three times a week Ö And there was located Ö Third Avenue Ö Right between Ö Sixth and Seventh Street was it Ö Right Ö Smackdown town Ö So there was Ö A busy place then for Ö Oh sure Ö There were a lot of people Ö There in the thirties because Ö Many of them were out of work and Ö They had to spend time Ö Doing something Ö Yeah Ö Iíd say back in the late thirties Ö The depression was over then Ö And most of the people were working Ö It was Ö Early thirties Ö That the depression Ö There werenít too many people working in Ö I guess up until 1930 Ö Four or five Ö If you really wanted a job Ö You could get one like I say Ö For eight or ten cents an hour Ö So Ö The generation after you then Ö Or Ö I mean Ö They were born in the thirties and the forties Ö They did not become interested in gymnastics Ö And athletics Ö Not as much Ö Why was that Ö In that respect Ö I guess they had other interests then Ö I Ö Like the soccer for instance Ö They didnít Ö They died out during the forties Ö More or less didnít they Ö Really never Ö Yeah Ö Well my father was on a soccer team Ö See back Ö Back the Ö In the twenties Ö Original Swedes back in the teens Ö Back before the twenties even Ö There were soccer teams Ö But I donít think there was any soccer Ö That I remember when Ö It was Ö He never tried to get you interested in soccer Ö No Ö He got me interested in gymnastics Ö Walking on my hands and Ö Tumbling Ö Things like this Ö In school it was football Ö Here in school it was football and basketball and baseball Ö So Ö But Ö So the school was stronger Ö To convince the young people to do that Ö Yeah Ö And there was no soccer in the schools Ö No Ö Itís just coming back right now Ö I think Ö Theyíre finally getting into soccer Ö But Ö Up until a couple of years ago Ö There was no soccer being played in Ö In this area Ö So they died out for a while then Ö Yeah Ö Football and baseball is the big thing I guess Ö Were you interested in baseball Ö Also Ö I played it at home with the kids Ö I played basketball on a team Ö But Ö Thatís about it Ö I Ö When I went to school I played in a band Ö I played Ö Clarinet in a band Ö So Ö How about your father Ö Was he interested in American football and baseball Ö Oh, he was interested in all sports Ö Yeah Ö Followed them Ö Went to baseball games Ö Yeah, went to baseball games Ö And Ö Interested in the boxing matches Ö And Ö So Ö So he was all around Ö All around athlete Ö When he was older Ö Yeah Ö Thatís right Ö Yeah Ö How about you said the music Ö Now were they interested in the musical instruments Ö You and your dad Ö I guess my father had Ö Played clarinet when he was in Sweden Ö At least he told me about that Ö But Ö It brought to it that we Ö Would be interested in music Ö My brother played the violin Ö They bought a violin for him Ö And he took lessons on a violin Ö They bought me a clarinet Ö And Ö I took lessons on the clarinet Ö And joined the band Ö My brother was in the orchestra in school Ö And I was in the high school band Ö In fact now Ö I havenít played the clarinet Ö Much since I got out of school Ö But Ö I took up Säckpifan Ö So I play Säckpifan Ö In Scottish Ö Well really when you come right down to it Ö Thereís a lot of Viking blood in the Scottish Ö So you belong to the Scottish Highlanders then Ö I did for a long time Ö I belong to the Scottish pipe band Ö Piped in the Haggis Ö And wore the kilts Ö And I still have the bagpipes Ö And I play occasionally Ö For Ö At church yet Ö For the kids in Sunday school Ö At Bible school I played the bagpipes Ö Because they enjoy that Ö You know itís a little bit different Ö How did you get into that Ö Iíve always liked the bagpipes Ö And Ö I finally Ö There was a fellow that came over from Scotland Ö That played the pipes Ö And he taught me how to play them Ö So Ö I Ö I learned how to play the pipes that way Ö So Ö I have enjoyed it Ö I like the music Ö Do you belong to Ö Any organizations of the Swedish Ö No Ö I donít belong to any Swedish organizations Ö No Ö Only the Ö Scottish Highlanders Ö Well I donít belong to that anymore either Ö Well Ö When Ö Oh Ö Let me see Ö About twenty some years ago Ö I guess my mother Ö Got Ö A little start of Ö Alzheimerís disease Ö And Ö So Ö For a long time Ö My wife and I did nothing but take care of the old people Ö That was Ö Her mother Ö Did not get Alzheimerís disease Ö And Ö She was Ö She was a nurse Ö And she was Ö She was a nurse Ö And she was Ö She was a nurse Ö And she was Ö She was a nurse Ö And she did not get Alzheimerís disease Ö But she was very forgetful Ö So Ö It seems that Ö We spent almost all of our spare time Ö Between Ö My parents and her parents Ö Going over there and taking care of them Ö So we didnít have time for anything else Ö We let everything else go Ö So Ö Thatís Ö We havenít found it yet Ö No Ö You were occupied with that Ö Yeah Ö We were really occupied with that Ö So about all we did was take care of old people Ö And aunts and uncles Ö We were Ö Since Ö We did not have Ö We did not have Ö We did not have Ö We did not have Ö We did not have Ö We did not have Ö We did not have Ö We did not have Ö We did not have Ö And since Ö We did not have any children Ö We were the ones that Ö And your daddy got sick Ö Had a little problem with that Ö Yeah Ö So we took care of Ö We went over Ö He had cancer and Ö Cooked for them Ö And cleaned house Ö And Ö Just babysat for them Ö I mean took care of my mother, you know Ö And Ö Had them over here for meals every Ö Weekend, it seems Ö And Ö Always Ö Did it keep you Ö So Ö Busy, huh? Yeah Ö So Ö Did Ö Did she go back to Sweden at that time, your mother Ö She went with my father Ö She went with my father twice, yes, in 54 and 63 they went over there. So you must have a lot of cousins then on her side. Yes, we were over there last year and we, I, I've been, this is about the fourth time we've been over there and I didn't know I had that many cousins, but they had a, what do they call it in Swedish? It was a Swedish, they decided to get together anyway, all the cousins. Yeah, and we were how many? 104. 104. So you represented the United States then for? Yes, we were going over on one of our vacations again and my youngest uncle was celebrating his 50th wedding anniversary, so we thought it just happened that they were going to have this anniversary at the same time we were going to be over there, so we decided it would be fun to get together with them. And we didn't know at the time they decided they would have a big reunion with all of the cousins. So when we got there, they rented a hall and we had a big dinner. Was it in Mjölby? This was in Mjölby, yeah. And so we, there were 104 cousins I believe over there and so it was quite a, in fact I think there were people there that lived probably in Mjölby, they hadn't seen each other before, didn't know they were related. And those are the Kardell? All from the Kardell select, yeah. Now see there were 14 in my mother's family, 14 children and now there's She was the oldest. She was the oldest girl. Now there's one left in America, Anton Kardell, lives down in Clearwater, Florida and he is 95 years old now and he's married to a new lady and she is 93 I believe and they're still living all by themselves down in Florida and they take care of themselves. They're still living in their own home down there. And that's the only uncle I have in America and I have this one uncle, Gilles, who is the youngest of the family in Sweden, in Mjölby and Aunt Agda. All the rest of them are gone now. Now I'm sitting together with Mrs. Pyrrha Carlson, Edlin, Celeste Nelson, your born Nelson. Yes. And it's still the 27th of October, 1986. So your parents now are John and Nanny Nelson, they came from Öland, Sweden. What year did your mother, your father? My father came here in 1902. And your mother? In 1905. So if I start with your father now, did he come from a farmer's home or? Yeah, they lived, they had a little farm. His father was a sailor and there were three kids left home when he left. There was he and his brother and an older sister and so he and his brother left and came to America because there was nothing doing up in Northern Öland at the time and things were bad. And his father sent home what he could. He worked on a boat also going between Sweden and Germany and over to England. And so that in order to help things at home, my father and his brother came to America. They had worked in Stockholm but they couldn't make enough money there either. You know, by the time they paid rent and bought food and clothing, they just simply couldn't do it. Can you tell them about what he told us about how he fished for flundra and when the Ö? Oh. Do you want the background of their childhood? Oh, well, it's, okay. It's just, it's just, yes, when they were home, they had nothing to do except to try to provide food for the family and the mother raised sheep and sheared and carded and spun the wool and made clothing and she also, so that she had a business, she made clothing for people from her wool. And then my father and his brother would go out in their boats and fish for flundra in the Kalmar Sund and they would bring home huge draughts of fish and they would dry them. They would stick a hole through them and hang them up in their attic upstairs of their, of the house. We've been to the home several times. And so then when they would need a fish during the winter, need food in the winter, which is what they ate all the time, the Erlendings eat fish, my grandmother would take dried fish and put the potatoes in the bottom part of the pot and put the fish on top and the fish would cook in the steam from the potatoes and that's what they ate. And anyway, they made their living from the sea mainly. So that's why I grew up to be a fish eater's daughter, but unfortunately my mother was from a farm, an inland farm, so that she liked meat. But your father and I, he was born in Lestod. Yeah. That's the name of the farm. Until he got dressed up in a ball. Yeah. Oh yes, well this is what my, this jumps forward to the time my father saw men walking on the moon and my father said it was so hard for him to realize and to think how wonderful it was that in his lifetime a man who did not have any vehicle when he was young and could live to see men walking on the moon, when his mother decided she was going to sell an old bull, she gave my father two Krupp Krocker wrapped in a paper and he put that in his pocket and he and the bull walked from Litorp down to Boyholm to the market and at night they stopped to sleep and he gave the bull one Krupp Krocker and he ate the other one and went on and this is the man who lived to see somebody walking on the moon and he never got over that. He thought that was marvelous. That's what you call read the book. Yes, well he, yeah, well he was. Yeah, well he probably knows all of this stuff. This is sweet. I mean that's, oh no, no, about the Krupp Krocker, no. And then, you know, I said my grandmother wove this wool and made suits for people and they also had the shoemaker that came around from house to house and he had no money, he made no money. He would come and live with families and make shoes for the whole family and while he lived there making shoes they would provide food and shelter for him so that he made no money but he was living. He had a place to sleep and food to eat and they waited for him. He was somebody that they looked for. But these are all things that my dad talked about in these dinners that we had for our parents in the olden, when they were old they would come over here and he would sit and reminisce in the afternoon. And his grandmother, my father's grandmother was a healer and her name was Eva and she was a little woman and she was also a midwife and he and his brother made money, made a few euro now and then. They would go into the bogs up around Hornhorn and pick leeches and then she would put them in a jar and use them for treating people, for bleeding people when she was, because she was a healer and they also picked herbs for her and she would pay them a few euro so that they got a little money. And I have a clock, a little teeny clock in the kitchen that my uncle earned when he was eleven years old. See, my uncle would be now 105. When he was eleven years old he dug potatoes. He had seen this clock in a store in Oscars Hum one time and he was madly in love with it. That was so beautiful. He wanted it for his mother and so when he was eleven years old he dug potatoes enough to buy that clock and I have it. It's been dropped a few times, that little porcelain clock. But that was from my uncle, from my father's brother. But they came from Stockholm in 1902 because there really was no opportunity for them and they could see that even after living in the big city there was no way for them to get ahead. So there were two brothers then? My father was the younger. So they left from Stockholm? Yeah. How did they get the money for the ticket now? Well they'd worked. They'd received, yeah they worked in Stockholm. They built the Nordiska Museet. They worked on that. They laid in the tiles and the floor and put in balustrades and things. My uncle described how he and my father worked and how stiff and sore they were at night and how cold it was when they worked there and how little money they got. And then they lived in Gumlaston, what we know as Gumlaston, which was then Stån, you know. And so anyway, that's why they decided to come here because there was no future. Did they have anybody to come to here? No. No. They went by... They no doubt had Irlanding friends that had come before but they had no family here. So they went from Stockholm then to... Came to Rockford. Yeah, how about the boat now? Did they take a boat from Stockholm? They probably came from Schippenham because they had... My father talked often about the restaurants, the fish restaurants along the canal. And so Bert and I have eaten there, you know. We thought it was kind of fun to go there. But that's where they ate when they were in Schippenham. So they probably came from there. I really don't know. But I assume... You never mentioned going over to England for a short labor camp? No. No. Because they went back in 1907 and then they went to England. They went that way on the boat. But they came to America in 1902. But I think that they came from Copenhagen then. So his brother now, what was his name? Carl Nelson. Carl Victor. And he was about the same age... He was two years older than my father. So they came together into Rockford. In 1902. That was many years ago. Yes. Yes. And they did various... Had various jobs around here. And in 1905, they decided they were going to seek their fortune in California. And so they went out to California and worked in... Lived in Sausalito, which is north of San Francisco. And they worked in the fruit packing business. Fruit shipping business, I guess you would say. They worked on boats carrying fruit out of the area. And he told of all of the various small gardeners and small vineyard owners that would bring their peaches and their grapes and things down to the boat in little bicycle carts they would have. They didn't have... A lot of them didn't have horses. They just peddled on little carts. And there's one thing we... It's terrible. We laugh about it. He said one day there was a... If you know the wharf there, everything is high, and then it comes down. And he said one day a man came riding down the hill with his load behind him, came down with his bicycle. And what they did was... Would be to ride up the plank onto the ship. And he said this man's brakes failed as he was coming down the hill. And he couldn't stop. He just kept on going up the plank instead of coming up loading. He just sailed right on through up the plank and wheeled right around the boat and off the other end with his bicycle and his fruit and himself. And they never found him. And that was one of our... One of the crazy stories that they tell. He just flew around the boat on the deck and off the other side, and they could never find him. He and his cart and his bike went. And his fruit. But anyway, my father got typhoid fever then out there, and so he had to be hospitalized. And this was before the earthquake of 1906. And then he came back to Rockford when he was healed. And then by that time, his aunt, his aunt Sophie had... No, it was my mother, his aunt and uncle had immigrated from Sweden, so they lived up in Michigan then. So then he had a family, and then some of his cousins came to Rockford, to the Rockford area. How about his brother? Did he stay on? He stayed here. Oh, no, he came back here with him. With him. So they were off there a couple of years then? Uh-huh, a year, a year only. Yeah, because he came back right before the earthquake. And he lived in San Francisco when he was recovering from typhoid. And they came back to Rockford then. And then he met my mother, and I don't know where. But my mother, maybe he met her at Harold Lodge, because Harold Magnuson of Rockford is a man who was... He had a pattern shop in Rockford. And he was a friend of my... His wife was a friend of my mother's. And my mother had joined the Harold Lodge when she came here. She was a member there in 1906. And my father, I suppose, joined the Lodge then. And then, you know, every Saturday night there would be Swedish things going on around here. There were things always. You know, newcomers were coming. And when Irlandings came, when there was going to be a bunch of people coming, somebody expecting a relative from Irland, the whole bunch would go down to the station. It was incredible. We have a picture my aunt gave us of the crowds that went down to the station, which was then a block and a half away from where my parents eventually lived, the train station on 7th Street and 6th Avenue. They rented an apartment there then? They rented a house when they first got married. They rented the lower, the downstairs of a house. But the crowds were just tremendous that came to the station. And so that people would see relatives or friends of relatives coming in so that there was always something going on with always the Swedes. I mean, always Swedish people together. And my mother was in on these things. But my father was the prominent one in Swedish organizations. He joined Svithjed in 1906. And we have pictures of a Svithjed picnic in 1906. I think there were about ten people there. And then, anyway, they were married in 1909. My father and mother were. And they were in the Saganlund Kresö. Yes. So they were religious people? No, no. My mother was. My mother always was. Not, not, I see, how would I put this? She did not come here with a Swedish religion, you know, the strict Swedish religion that drove so many people out of Sweden. This was the reason for many people leaving. It was not hers because my mother had family living here. But my father would go to church like Bert's father on Jolotta for baptisms and confirmations of his kids. And we always went to Sunday school. But my father was more interested in the lodge aspect of fraternal orders, you know, I think. So he was an officer there in Sweden? Yes, and he is one of the charter members and the first president of the Erlandsklub. And he belonged to John Eriksson and Herolage. What is the name of the fraternity? Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. What about Erlandsklub? Do you remember, or was this started before you were born? No, no. It was started, let's see, 19... 1929. 1929. Mm-hmm. It was quite late though because there were a lot of Irelands... Oh, yeah. But you see, that's the thing. There had been so many immigrants, so many people coming over, you know, and by that time, immediately, when they came over, everybody was scrambling for a job. You know, there were so many people and the Americans needed domestics. And so that's what the Erlending gals were doing and of course the men were good carpenters and good workers, whatever they did. My father happened to be a cabinetmaker. He was, well, he wasn't a cabinetmaker in Sweden. He didn't do anything like that, but he was marvelous doing handwork, you know, carving and things. So that is what he, that is what he ended up being, was a cabinetmaker. And he had, he opened his own factory, a little shop, factory, shop in 1910. He was a partner with another man in 1910. And this is next door to where the news tower is on State Street now. And then he went, from there, he went into a partnership. There was an established firm, Norberg and Fagerberg, a upholstering company. My father went into that, bought into that. And so then he did the antique repairing and little things like that. But he was the vice president of that company. And also they, I believe just the president had no real work of the company. He was like the cashier of the everything house, you know. It was small. There were perhaps, at the most, ten people working there, twelve people. What was the name of it? Norberg and Fagerberg Upholstering. They burned down in 1946. And my father was still working there at the time. And he lost, unfortunately lost all of his little, the little tools that he had made for little specific jobs. He lost them all in the fire. So he was kind of upset over that because he, over the years, had made many little special tools. But then he opened up a little shop in his garage. And so he had always done antique work for the wealthy, the very wealthy people of Rockford. And they would buy antiques and he would refinish them or antiques would break and he would restore them. And this was his main job. And then he continued to do that in his garage. Hand carving too? Yeah, he did hand carving. And he continued to do this until he died. He had a stroke in 1969 and then he was diagnosed as having cancer in 1970. And he died in 1972. But he kept on, even in 1971, he kept on working, doing things in his little shop in his garage. So the girls from Sweden are working in the families. They worked only for American families. Well if there were wealthy Swedish families, I am sure that at the time P.A. Peterson and John Nelson from the Nelson Knitting Company must have been wealthy enough to hire people. And I'm sure that they had Swedish girls working for them also. But the Swedish wealthy were in a minority at that time. And they lived on the east side of Sweden? For the main part, yeah. And all of the wealthy Americans lived along the river or on the west side over on Harlem Boulevard and National Avenue, you know, along the river. Those were the large homes. And my mother's aunt and uncle had come here. Her aunt had married and her uncle married. And so she had American cousins when she came here. And one of them became a missionary from Trinity Church. And the other two were associated with Rockford College. One was the secretary to the presidents at Rockford College until she retired. I think she worked for about three or four presidents. And the other one retired when they went out to the new campus when they changed from down along the river. Did she go to college then to get this position? No. My mother? No. No. My mother didn't have this position. Her cousin. Yeah, her cousin. Yeah. Yeah, her cousins were all educated. They were all college educated girls. And I believe they went to Carthage, all of them. But like your mother now, she was six years old. My mother was 21 when she came here. She was quite sophisticated when she came. She had worked at Runneby for three years. And she worked just in a home there. And for some wealthy Swedes who had made their money in America and Mexico in silver. And we were there. As a matter of fact, we stayed in that home last summer. I don't know how many rooms was in that house. It was about a 15-room house or something that she lived in. Freed him? Yeah, freed him in Runneby. And she stayed there. She was a servant. She was not a cook and she wasn't a scrub maid. She was a companion to the woman and took care of the little boy. They had only one child then. They had another after she left. But her older sister had gone there first from Ireland. To Rockford? To Runneby. To free them? Yeah, because nobody but my mother immigrated from her immediate family. How did she get the idea to go to America? Well, her aunt and uncle had gone to America. And she had a girlfriend. And her girlfriend wanted to go. And she figured as long as Nanny had an aunt and uncle here, it would be fun. Everybody was going. That's what they were doing. And they had left Ireland. My mother had a nice home. Her father had a corn. And then they had a, you know, they had a, so that they had people would come to grind things there. And she had brothers that did not get married. They stayed on the farm. So that, it was really quite, they had quite a nice household. But there was still no future for anybody there at all. And finally she and her girlfriend decided that they were going to go to Rockford. And that's what they did. They came right to Rockford. And she didn't have a boyfriend at the time? No, no. No, she was, as a matter of fact, my mother was 25 years old before she got married. She and my father were married in 1909. And my mother was 25. So she was not a, she wasn't looking for a husband. Let's put it that way. But it happened. And then her sister came to America and married a man and lived down in Texas. So my mother went there in 1907 when my cousin was born. And then they had, her brother-in-law, her sister's husband in Texas became ill and died. And so then her sister took her little boy, Eric, went back to Sweden. And she died within a year after she came back. So my cousin was reared by my grandmother and grandpa. And Eric had the Gulf Special Environment Home. Yes, and Eric, yes, Eric had. Now Baked has it. Now his son has it, yeah. So where in Texas did she live? Galveston. Oh, Galveston. So the Swedes are ranging far and wide. I mean, they really were. And her husband, who was a Swede, also had served on a boat because I brought to my cousin one time something I found in my mother's attic. And it was a Bible from an African station, a station in Africa. It was printed in English and it was given to seamen. But it was, so that he had been working from Texas to Africa then. And this Bible had been given to him when he was in Africa. But I didn't know this until I found this Bible. And then my mother had died in 1977. So she never told, you know, had mentioned this, probably didn't know it. So then they married in 1909, and they settled down there in close to... Yeah, 6th Avenue, close to 7th Street, a block and a half from 7th Street, which was the center of all Swedes. So you were born 1922 then, they were all Swedish. Did you speak Swedish at home all the time? No, I didn't because I was next to the youngest. My sister next to me is six years older. My brother was 12 years older than, my eldest brother was 12 years older than I. So all of those kids had gone to school. And I knew English. I sang English and I spoke English when I was young. I didn't... No problem in school then? No. My brothers and sisters went to Sweden school, and my parents spoke... My mother spoke excellent English because when she came here, her cousins were educated girls and they spoke English. And my mother worked in American homes and she spoke very good English. My father still had a little more, whatever you call, drag or something. He still spoke with an accent, but my mother had very little accent. And it wasn't that my mother was trying that hard to get rid of it because my mother was an avid Erlending. If she heard that anybody, if anybody that she talked to on the phone said that anybody was having company from Erland, my mother called those people up and I have told Brooke that I cannot even say how many days I came home from school and there was a coffee party going on at our house and it was somebody from Erland. My mother was just avid to hear things about Erland, but she had a big household of kids and she knew she would never get back. So she was just eager to hear about what was going on, especially from her area, you know, from Stirling and the area of her school, the people that she knew, the families that she knew. She came from Jeslösa? Mm-hmm. And at that time I suppose a lot of Erlendinger came. Oh, yes. Very often. It was very bad over there. There was nothing and, you know, very depressed. So did they stay in your parents' home when some of the people came from Erland? They didn't have a boarder? No, no, they didn't have any room. We were six kids, you know, my family. So we had company, invited company, and when invited company came, we had a sleeping porch and so then us kids were always bunked out there. The youngest ones had to sleep on quilt mattresses on the floor, but otherwise we had three bedrooms in our home and so we always, the kids always gave up bedrooms for company. But I can't remember anyone from Erland ever staying with us because none of our relatives ever came. Nobody came. That was ours. So when they came, did they get help then from the people who were already here? I mean, did they get a job, for instance, and get into a church or an organization? Well, how did they help them? I don't know. My mother came to her relatives, but my mother had worked since she was 14 and she was now 21, so she had money. She, I mean, she'd worked for seven years, so when you say she had money, it wasn't like we would do now going someplace to have thousands of dollars with us. But she, we have many pictures of her. She had beautiful clothes so that they dressed well and everything.