 And then read it in California, Dorothy's mother. Cassette two, side one, with Dorothy Serving, Moline, Illinois. So then they knew exactly what Amanda was doing out in Moline, California and in Sweden. So she kept all until her... Yeah, well she was in a nursing home for five years and she couldn't read it then. Did you read it at any time? Oh, not much. You read what she wrote, though? Yeah, but she sometimes wouldn't even tell it. I'd find out from somebody else. So she wasn't advertising it. So you didn't find anything of interest in that paper? No. What had been... I'd been too busy. I had enough to read my own newspaper. So there was no way to appeal then to the younger generation to read that paper. In other words, when that person died, there was the end of the line. Yeah. Because that was happening. I guess what I should have done, I should have written to the... I don't know if I did it or not. I should have written that she died, you know. Yes, they probably wondered what happened to her. Uh-huh, yeah. But I don't remember if I did or not. I don't remember. So she had it for many years? They had it... From the beginning. They had it from the beginning. When they were married, they started. She had that all the time. Was it the only paper? They didn't have any... Well, they had Augustana, of course. Before the Hitler's call, but I mean, it was Augustana years ago. Yeah, uh-huh. So there was her paper. How about your father? Was he interested to read it, too? Not as much as my mother. My mother was more of a reader anyway than he was. But I think maybe he looked at it. When she was home, your dad was out working. Did she have any coffee parties for the lady friends? Oh, yes. They come over in the morning or in the afternoon? Yeah, sure. In the afternoon? Well, any time you came, you got coffee. And then they were talking about the latest news and what happened to different people. Do you remember if they had any, what we called in Swedish, sygjonta? They come together and saw and stitch and... Yeah, but that was mostly at church. At church. You never saw it in the home? No. They would... Husband come home and see they were sitting there stitching maybe, the whole gang over. Oh, well, maybe they would... I don't know if they... But that was not in the church? Yeah. For the church. For the church. And also at the hospital. She went a lot to the hospital. In those days, the hospital was poor and they... Well, everybody was poor in those days, I think. Maybe no prices. Oh, well, no, they would go there and mend. See, they had hospital circles that helped. We still have them. And there were groups there that would go and do mending. You mean sheets and bed wares and stuff like that? Yes. They don't do that today. I don't think. Although the other day I saw a sheet mended there and I thought, I didn't know that they did it today. But they didn't... They used to have groups there that would go once a week. And it was voluntary? Absolutely. Yeah, but it's run differently today, though, now it's a business. Well, there have... I do a lot of volunteer work at the hospital. I get all the workers to work at the gift center. We have a different... Like a store? Yeah, uh-huh, like a shop. And there's volunteer work? All volunteer work. An awful lot of people do a lot of volunteer work at the hospital today. And that's through the hospital circles. And we have people work in the morning, afternoon, and evening. So we have three sets of people and different almost every day. So I take care of the day people. And I have at least 60 different people working there. And I schedule that, see. And I've done that ever since I retired. And then I do... They don't do anything on the floor, though, I mean, for the sick people. No. Like nurses, they are professionals. Yeah, uh-huh, uh-huh. This is only for the service. But there are a lot of people that sit in different places and at a desk, an information desk. That's volunteer work. And in another section, when people have friends or relatives being operated on, where they sit there and wait, and then the volunteer person takes their name and has a phone there, and the doctor calls down and says that now they've gone to intensive care or something like that, and he'll be down to talk to the family soon. And then they have coffee there, so they can sit and have coffee while they wait. And this person will answer any questions for them. An awful lot of volunteer work done going on. People deliver flowers. That's all volunteer work. Years ago now, when people got sick, they didn't have any insurance, no way to pay the hospital bill. How did they get operated on then? Then you had to pay before you leave the hospital. But if you couldn't pay, they couldn't keep you on until you had to get off work before you could pay. They did operate on them. Yeah, they did. But today they wouldn't do it at all. You have a sign that you want to pay, and if you're not able to pay, they won't operate on you. Yeah, yeah, that's right. But years ago, what happened then? There was no refusal? Oh, I don't know. I don't know. But I remember being in the hospital, and before you left, you had to pay up. They wouldn't release you? No. Years ago, they couldn't pay some major operations. I don't know how they did that. Of course, sometimes I wonder. They had a family doctor like they have today, years ago. Like your doctor now, do you have a family doctor? Yeah. And then he would come to the house, too. He'd make house calls. But if an operation was needed, was he the one that was doing the operation, or was a special hospital doctor that did it? No, he would do the operation. Was there a Dr. Arp? Yeah. Was he a Swede? No, they weren't Swedish. I think they were just English descent. But they married Swedish girls. They did? One of them did. But there were two brothers? Henry? Yeah, there was a father first. He was also a doctor. He was also a doctor. And then he had two sons that became a doctor. Then Louis had a son that is a doctor now. In Moline? Yep. So that's a third generation. Was all the Dr. Arp that was buried without a casket, they said? Without a casket? Yeah, somebody told me that. Oh. Is that true? I never heard that one before. But I know I always heard that he lived in a house right almost next to the public hospital up on Fifth Avenue there. So the public hospital was the first one in Moline? Yeah. And then the Lutheran came in? Uh-huh. And then the Lutherans started. Uh-huh. The isn't? Seventy. Uh-huh. Seventy. And then it was founded then when you were a teenager. Yeah, I remember when it was started. Teenager, you remember? Uh-huh. So that was a humble beginning. Because it was one of our ministers that really helped start it. Yes. Bergstrom. Bergstrom, the first Lutheran. Oh, yes. Most of them, not like Miss Dahlgren was there. She was the head. And Hillman Nelson, she was a cook. And those two were the main ones at that time. Oh. Yeah. And there were not too many beds to start with? No. It was just that one wing. And there was a home there, and that big home became the nurse's home. And then the one wing of the hospital was added to that, and that was all there was to it. Well, I guess it was three stories. So the Moulin Public, now, what happened? Was that too small, or why didn't they expand that one instead of starting a brand-new one? You mean? The Moulin Public was already there? Yeah. There was a hospital by itself. Yeah. And it was owned by a group of doctors, I suppose. Yeah, well, it was under Moulin. Well, Lutheran Hospital really was from the Lutheran Church. Yes. But why did they start a separate hospital instead of helping out to increase another one? I don't know. I suppose the churches. They tried to? I guess so. Because they established quite a few hospitals, different places. Yeah, in Chicago. Yeah, in Chicago. So they catered to the Swedish people at Moulin, in Rock Island? Yeah. That's what you say. Yeah. To help them out, then. I guess so. They were all Swedish doctors, I suppose, or Swedish background doctors. Of course, now it's everything. Now everything comes in. And sometimes they're going to merge, you know. They always talk about that. Yeah, but they can't agree. Neither one, I think, wants to give up their identity. But I think in many ways they work together, pretty much, because Lutheran has a special cancer section there, and now all the babies are born over in the public hospital. And so that way they kind of specialize each one, so they're not duplicating in that way. There's no delivery room then in Lutheran? No, not anymore. So they agree on that and they specialize in the same? Yeah. And we started with the cancer, so that stays there. Oh. So Dr. Arp was your family doctor? No, no, he was not ours. He was not yours? No, he was not ours. But this sounds like a Swedish name, though, Arp. But maybe he wasn't. But Henry Arp, he married a Swedish gal, Mortsen. Would you mean Anders Morrison's daughter? His sister. She's Mrs. Henry Arp. Is she still living? Yeah. Mortsen, you know, was a teacher at Augie. His father? Uh-huh. His first name was Julius. Julius. Julius Morrison. Yeah, they belonged to our church. Yes. So they, quite a few of them from August 10, I went to the first Lutheran. Yeah, because you see. Despite the distance. Well, you see, ours was the first one there. But then you had Zagenburg. The biggest. Yeah, that was smaller. But some of the professors went there, but Mortsen was in ours. He came to first Lutheran. And then there was Andre. Dr. Burgendorff, he belonged to? He belongs to St. John's. St. John's. But he's been in our church a lot. Because a lot of times when we had, when we were between preachers, one time he filled in there. So they've been the main, the modern church, first Lutheran, many smaller ones. Yeah. Like Faith. Calvary, Faith. Port Byron. Port Byron, East Moline, Calvary, well, Calvary I said. And. When the town got bigger, they had to have some. There's one expression I heard. And Trinity. Trinity is a big one now. Of course, you see, ours was all Swedish first. Then we got a little bit English. And then some of those people, they didn't want to have anything to do with Swedish. So then they started Trinity. What do you think happened then when they got a little bit hot under the cover? Oh. To break away, you know, do you think that dampened the culture tie here with the Swedish background? In cases like that? Well. They want to. Yes, yes. But you know, after a while, after they grew older, then they wanted to be a Swede again. So then what happened? Oh, I remember, I remember when they, those old ladies would cry because you're taking the Swedish away from us. And, you know, you don't want us to go to church. You don't want us to have our Swedish. They just were fighting for it. And then we'd have a Swedish and an English service. And then every other service. And then one Swedish a month. And pretty soon those people were dead. Well, then, you know, those that had cried the most were. So when they died, that hid them all together? Yeah. Mm-hmm. And some of those people came back to our church. They did? Uh-huh. There were a few of them that came back. And I think the reason we probably have lost some now because our, we've got older people in our church and not too many young ones. And then the Sunday school is small. And then they feel like the kids don't have enough activity in the Sunday school or with the young people. They think they're going to get more when they go to Trinity that has more. And so that's where we've lost some members. But we're going up again now. We're getting some new people. So what do you think? There has been changes now within the church over the years. I mean, if you go back 200 or 300 years, there always has to be changes. And there's always an outcry, you know, every time they change a little too much and so on. Do you think the tradition is the most important thing in a person's life going to a church? Or is it that changes all the time is erupting your schedule a bit? I don't know. They seem to cater more for the young people than to the old ones today in the church. Yeah, I don't think ours do. We have an old people's, our retired people, I should say. We call ourselves Power. We met today. This is a local? This is our church retired group. I see. There's nothing on the national scope, in other words. No, no. Local. We call ourselves Power. Power. Positive opportunities with energetic retirees. Isn't that a nice name? No, it's a very good abbreviation. It doesn't sound like old people at all, does it? Well, we just meet to, for fun. We don't do any work or anything. We just meet to... Today we had a potluck at church, and then we went to Putnam Museum over in Davenport. We had the bus pick us up and take us back. We were a pretty good group. Did they tell you anything about this new evangelical Lutheran church? No, they've had some... I haven't been to any meetings, though. I think there's supposed to be one this week somewhere, but I haven't gone to any of them. Because it's not settled yet, Anna? No. You say you live in East Maltin? Yes. Which church do you go to? Faith. Oh. The 41st. Pastor Hague's church. He's got an all-force. Yeah. He was the first one there, wasn't he? He was. You have a Nelson there now, don't you? Yes. But the Philip was the one that was before. Yeah, yeah. Who died so suddenly. Yeah, he surely did. So a pastor has certainly a lot of things to do with the congregation, to keep it alive. Oh, yeah. Years ago, they stayed so many years in the church. Yeah. They are changing it more often. What do you think is the best solution, though? If you get a good pastor and he likes to stay on, isn't that a more relaxing atmosphere within the congregation? Yeah. But I think usually, I think the younger ones think that it's time to move on. Is the pastor getting tired, do you think? I don't know. I don't know. Years ago, they used to stay. I remember Rockford, first moved to Rockford, Dr. Lorraine, he was there for 42 years. Yeah. Oh, we had one, Moreland, I forgot how many years. He was on there. Yeah, yeah. So this is why I mean the tradition means quite a bit to people when they're getting older. They're at home. Yeah, I would, you know, some people, oh, they don't like that minister, so then they go move somewhere else. I think more of my church. They go by their personality than the pastor. Yeah. It's my church and that's where I want to stay. It's the anchor at home. Are there any, in the church now over the years, like First Lutheran, the women have played a tremendous role, there's no question about it, like sewing circles and the ladies' aide, and in the kitchen, preparing dinners and lunches and everything. And on the board now today. That's right, but I mean years ago they never got the chance to. No. Why? I mean they put the women down. All they could do was cook and cook the coffee and, of course, I don't know. Do you mean that the men actually believed that it was the only thing they could do? Well, the women were supposed to be in the home years ago, but today they're in business and almost all the women are working. So they were suppressed then for many, many years, of course, because do you think that the wife told her husband on the board how to vote many times? Did he actually have his wife's thoughts when he voted on the board? I don't know. You never see it in the minutes. No. No women on the minutes. No, no, no. It's just been in later years, and now I know. I think we have half and half now. Is it that many? Yeah. In our church. That's fine. Yeah. And it seemed like years ago they had to be so old before they could be on the board. Well, we've got some young people on the board now, which I think is very good, because even though they're learning, they're learning at least. You had some older ones on too, though. Oh, yes. Stabilizing. But I think years ago it had to be the real old ones that were on, and we've got more young people now. So your dad was on the council, you said, on the board. Yeah, years ago. He was a Trustee. Was he old before he could get on the board then? Forties? Oh, yeah. He was past that, I think. Oh, yeah. He was past that. He was in his 50s. I bet late 50s. In those days it was all old men, it seemed like, to be on the board. Were there more old people than they decided to vote them in? I don't know. They didn't. I don't think they. I don't think they respected young people in those days. And really, I think the young people do a better job of it today and do more for the church than. They take more chances than the old ones. Yeah. I don't know. I know my nephew's been on the board now. Well, right now he isn't on the board, but he's a treasurer of the church, so he meets with the board, though he isn't considered one of the members of the board. But he's been on the board. He's just in his late 30s. And it's people like that that are really. He spends an awful lot of time down there. So they give you the backbone for what to operate. Mm-hmm. And how about the Sunday school? Do they still meet like they did years ago? Well. Sunday morning? Yes, yes. But when I taught Sunday school, we were Sunday school teachers forever and ever. Now they can't get them. Now they have a team working about four months, and then there's another group, and then... Oh, it's different. But it just seemed like it's hard to get Sunday school teachers anymore. They don't want to take the responsibility anymore? No, uh-uh. It's a changing world. Yep, it is. Mm-hmm. And the new church, we don't know what's going to turn out. Yeah. It's going to be big administration or forgetting about the small congregation. Uh-huh. What do the people say about it? There's not so much discussion about it. Well, since we lost our identity as Augustana Lutheran Church. Most of them blow, you think, to the most Augustana people. And now when you... Before, of course, those days the seminary was here. Well, we got acquainted with all the ministers because an awful lot of them came to our church. And we got acquainted with them before they went out to their churches even. Now you read the church paper and you don't know any of them. It doesn't mean so much anymore. No, no, it doesn't. And I think that makes a difference when you... I mean, before you knew them all and you were interested in reading about them. But it's different today. It's strange, though, that the old stubborn Swedes went along with that merger because there were certainly enough churches and congregations to keep it going. 1,250 congregations. Of course, I think the old stubborn Swedes were gone maybe by that time. Well, maybe they were. I think so. How many years ago? 1962. Is it 1962? Yeah, but it was probably worked on in the 50s, so 55. Yeah. I was wondering if there were the young laymen or the young pastors they brought in. Some say it was because of better pensions they wanted. Oh, because it was a bigger unit. Yeah. When you have, for instance, the Evangelical Covenant Church, there are much more number of churches and they are still active and going. So it's not necessary to be big to be successful. No. The smaller unity gives a more familiar feeling, I think, to... Yeah, yeah. Cassette 2, side 2. 33 in Moline, Illinois. So there's always discussions and progress made in different areas. Like you said, the old Swedes, they are falling by the wayside. Yeah, I think long ago. But I have a feeling, though, that the old timers, they need a tradition of going to church and they don't want too many changes. And then when they change the hymnal too much, that doesn't give them a good feeling. They're lost. Yeah. And we don't like to learn the new songs. How about you now being a musician? How about being an organist? I've gotten away from that. But you still have it. I mean, you know when you don't have to play for something or practice for something, it's so easy to get away from that piano. If I had something that I had to practice for, then it would be more of an incentive to play. I always feel too busy now. I have to run to the hospital too many times. So you won't be involved with that. No. And it seems like we don't sing as much as we used to. We always used to sing at all our meetings. They don't do that anymore. They don't do that. Well, the same thing outside the church. People that were singing more years ago, they don't do that anymore. No. Or whisting or anything like that. You don't hear that. And whenever you had a meeting, you always had a quartet singing or a solo or something like that. Now you don't have that. And I think it's too bad. Is that because people are inconvenienced? I don't know. I don't know why they... Of course, we still have our good choirs. I used to sing in the choir all the time too, until I can't sing anymore. And I don't sing. They practice once a week, though. Oh, yeah. And we still have our good choir. We've kept that up. Days gone by. The stores now in Moline, there were quite a few of Swedish background. You had the furniture stores, Y Dean. Chalene's used to be... Did the Swedes cater to those stores or did they go to others? Oh, I think they did. So they were able then to follow along with the trend of fashion. So when you went to buy some of the clothing when you got older, did you go to Chicago then shopping sometime or did you find what you needed in Moline? Oh, no. If I was up there, maybe I'd... But I wouldn't especially go there to shop. Moline was... And also Rock Island had... Yeah. Those were the days when you go downtown and stores would be open on Saturday nights and the streets were full of people. And you'd hear... This was a long time ago, of course. You'd hear Swedish here and Belgium here and maybe some German. And the people dressed up then to go down on Saturday night? Yeah. It was the day off. Mm-hmm. And the night off. Well, they would dress up when they went anywhere. Today they sometimes don't even dress up to go to church. No rest days anymore. Uh-huh. So... And then they had the movie houses down there on Fifth Avenue too, or...? Yeah. Mm-hmm. They had two or three of them. They had one up here on the hill too. It was torn down just recently. Did you belong to any Swedish organizations? You never joined the Viking or Vasa? No. Not the Temperance organization either? No. You got full activities with your school work later on when you got... Mm-hmm. So you were hired by Moline school system and stayed on with them for 42 years? 44. And I stayed in the same school the whole time. But I had different grades there. Uh-huh. It's a long... Nobody can serve that long anymore. No. I suppose. No, because I started when I was 20. I just had two years of college, you know. And those were the days when they hired... Did you have to go in for supportive schooling or anything like every five years or ten years? Oh, yeah. Yeah. You had to do that. Yeah. I finally... When I went into kindergarten, then I finally got my degree, my four-year degree. Mm-hmm. Allsättmarkon? No. That was at National College in Evanston. Mm-hmm. Oh. And there were mostly female teachers at that time? Yeah. Why were the... The men didn't go into school teaching at all? They came after the 40s and 50s? Yeah. Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. Although, when I went to Macomb, there were some... Well, we were mostly girls, but there were quite a few boys. Mm-hmm. But then the boys went into... Well, they go into high school teaching. But you'd hardly ever see them in the grade schools. And then after a while, they had men principals, and now they got all men principals. I don't know if we have any... Maybe we've got one or two ladies yet. Why do they... There seems to be kind of odd, though. I mean, only male superintendents and supervisors. Why it seems to me that the female side is pushed down, because they must have the qualifications for it. Yeah. And experience. Yeah. Is this some kind of journalistic idea? I don't know. Yeah, that's the way it seemed like. It seemed like when they started... Of course, they always had a man for a high school principal, but... Well, I had, in my years of teaching, I only had one man, the last one, for a principal. And I had one, two, three... three women, and then one man in my days, in my 44 years. In your case, though, for instance, if you had served as a principal in the last five or six years, you would certainly have the qualifications for it, I mean, to run that school. Oh, I think... Why do they... Who else would qualify for it? I mean, did they have more schooling then, or... Yeah. They have to take a few extra courses. To reach the principal, I think. Yeah. But that's a job I wouldn't want. No? I'd rather deal with the kids. Not the parents? Not the... Well, I deal with parents, too, but I wouldn't want to deal with... The taxpayers. I don't want to deal with teachers. And the teachers, yeah. Teachers and taxpayers. So how many teachers were there in the Moravian School System when you started? When I started, I think we only had ten or twelve schools. But when I ended... Let's see. I remember I was in charge of Red Cross at one time, and I think then we only had about ten or twelve schools. And then we had a lot more after that. So they've added. As the city grew up, bigger and bigger. Uh-huh. Uh-huh. And then they went backwards, and then they had to close some of those schools. It was in the 60s? No, that's just recently. Oh, yes. That's... When they closed some of them. All of a sudden they had to close about four or five of them. It was the baby boomers ended them. So it is hard to predict the future. Yeah. Schools and churches, not only... Yeah, the same. I say sometimes they've got too many churches. Well, I suppose it's... Yeah, it looks like that. So many different non-denominational churches. It's a wonder how they can survive. Yeah. They seem to thrive pretty good. Yeah, yeah. It's a mobile society. Yeah. So what have you praised highest now in the Swedish country that you have received from your parents? And the visits going back to Sweden. You have been six times in Sweden. What is it you treasure the most? I think Sweden is a fine country. And I think Sweden has changed a lot. They have a different color today. Some of them. Yeah. But I mean, like my aunt, after she gave up her farm, and she was a housekeeper for a man and girl. She was very lucky. She was treated like one of the family. Where we were invited there as if he was our relative too, you know. But then when he died, and they built a new old people's home, I guess you'd call it. And she put her name in there, and she went in there. Really, it was very, very nice. She had a room of her own, and it was a lovely place. So the old people there are well taken care of. It was a lovely place. Now where were you from?