 This is cassette 2, side 1, continuation with Reverend Spong, Oman, Nebraska, cassette 2, side 1. So, about, you know, years ago, the old Augustana churches, they collected money for the China mission and the mission in Africa and India. Well, a lot of people in our churches do not understand what has taken place in the fields of mission work today. We are today reaping the crops from the work that has been done in the past to go to the fields, what we call mission fields, and start work and bring about Christian church. They are carrying it out on their own now. For example, Japan, a church very small, yet an indigenous church. They are their own church. They are the mission field. They are no longer under anybody else. They have their own church. Africa, most of the places have their own church. India, the same. You go right on down the line, you have this kind of thing. They are training and ordaining their own pastors. In India today, we have no missionaries that are working direct with the people. That doesn't mean that the mission work isn't being done, because they are doing it themselves. And we are helping them in the sense of sending them whatever they ask for. They call us. We don't go out there and say we're going to start something. But they call on us for what they would want. And we're spending just as much money as we always have in those mission fields by the things that we're doing. We're helping them with their crops. We're helping them develop farming, irrigation, digging wells, you name it. This is the kind of thing we're doing. Pharmacy, we have the church that I was serving part-time as a visitation pastor in Venice, they're supporting a missionary and his wife in Nepal who are pharmacists. And they are witnessing as they go, as they serve over there. It's a different approach entirely. And whereas we had a hard time getting converts in a lot of these places, Africa today is growing by leaps and bounds because their own people are doing it. And it's a different thing. This is the result of the work that was done by our missionaries in earlier days. So you primed the pump and now it's taking hold? It's going on its own. Look at China. China is growing very fast as a Christian movement, Christian church. Not necessarily Lutheran or any other. But the seed was planted and it's been there and it's growing, growing tremendously. They are opening an older church or building a new one and opening it every day of the year in China. So our people report to us. This is the kind of missionary work that it is. And our people here think that we're not doing anything, but we are. We're assisting them with literature, Bibles, printing, that kind of thing. They ask for this kind of help and we're able to give it to them. But no missionaries are going out then, so to speak? No, we're not sending missionaries as such. You see, that has been so paternalistic, we call it. In other words, they have looked on us as being strong, wealthy, overpowering and they had to kowtow to what we brought there. I was in Chicago, or actually Evanston, in 1957, or 54 it was, 1954, when I attended the World Council of Churches. And there I heard people from India, for one particularly, say, that which you have brought to us must be broken in style and we must start our own and do our own kind of thing. And there were two people, missionaries from England, who simply wept when they heard this because they said, well, what we have established cannot be broken up. It's got to go on. But it has been broken up and they're going on on their own, which is the way it should be done. And they're growing much more rapidly today than what we could do if we were sending missionaries. But there was a necessity to start it up, though. Oh yes, absolutely. Because we've got to have the leadership in the right direction. And there are still places in the world where this is happening. Now, we are suggesting, in fact, our Bishop Anderson suggested it at a meeting that I attended on Tuesday, that the idea is now that we're going to bring in some of those people from the new fields like Africa and India and other places to come here and inspire and regenerate the Church in this country. Because they have the spark. They're really excited about it. And they come in here with enthusiasm, the kind that we have lost in many of our churches. Is that because at the time you think the morale or the too comfortable living or what is it? Well, in 1972, we were in East Germany and we also attended church. We spoke to pastors over in East Germany. We've been with them other times, too. And from there we went to Hanover and visited with Bishop Hans Lilje. And I said to Lilje, are the people in the East Zone perhaps more attentive to church and their Christianity than the people in the West? He says, oh, by all means. He said, we in West Germany have gotten so materialistic that we just don't have the same feeling and desire and need for our church and our Christianity. And that's, I think, what's happened here. We've become too soft. Well, you know what's happened in Sweden with the Lutheran Church. But they are big givers, though. Well, that's only through the government. No, but they give, each congregation gives tremendous to foreign missions. Always done. Yeah, and the reason for that is that the churches in Sweden do not have to pay the pastor because he's paid by the government. And so the money they take in, they free it for these other causes. It doesn't go to light and upkeep like that. That's right. That's right. I mean, so there is a difference. Now, true, which churches, what are the churches that are really going in Sweden but the free churches. I've been there, I know, I've attended some of those. Pingsvallorna and Happisdårn. Yeah, Pingsvallorna. But it's the same thing here with the Assembly of God. Sure, sure. Like in Rockford, they are showing off like rising stars. I know, that's exactly right. But why is people throwing everything away for messages like that? Because they have two churches now in Rockford, one seating 5,000. Under construction is one for 7,500 across the street. And they're just going. Well, I say we in the Lutheran Church must limber up, become more spirit-filled, and yes, get away from being so smug, satisfied, and get out and really go to work. Yeah, but do you think the Lutheran will take a minister like Jimmy Swaggart when he goes on there? No. I don't think they ever stand for a sermon like that. Well, Jimmy Swaggart isn't the best one either. Billy Graham is probably a... He's no middle of the road. He's a stronger person. Well, sure, the pink-spanning line in Sweden are pretty strong. You know that. Yes. There's also the Mechun Chirka. The Mechun Chirka, yes. I know that. The Baptists are not that... No, no, no. But that's because they are free and they really are not afraid to witness and to go out and evangelize. That's what our church is talking about. That's what they're talking about for our new ELCA. Become more free, evangelize, go out and witness. There's a long, strong program that's going on on that. And how to get that going is to liven up and stir up, I don't know. Well, maybe they say then we can join the assembly of God instead. Ha, ha. Because they are used to it. They are trained. We just don't have the same belief as that. We can't do... They like Skogsborg, you remember, and Texas Johnson, do you remember? Yes, sure. Gustav Johnson? Yeah, Gus Johnson. He was one. He, Georgetown, he was born in Georgetown. That's right. Next door to Ron Ruff. Yeah. So did you hear him speak? I've heard Gus Johnson speak. Yes, I have. And he filled the tent meetings and the tent posts all over? All over. But then we used to have similar things in the Lutheran Church. We could have big meetings like that and preach evangelism. If you remember Dean Miller from LBI? Yes. Used to come out. We had big meetings. I remember going to youth meetings in Rock Island and Linsburg. Strong evangelistic sermons. We need to get back to that somehow or new approach, whatever it might be. To wake people up. Sure. Like one lady... I'm teaching a Bible class down at Trinity Lutheran now. And like one lady says, should we go back to hellfire and brimstone? I don't know. Well, I think we've got to come alive somehow. I mean, it's got to be life. Because a dead thing is dead. That's all. But you think now people are so educated. It doesn't help. In the 60s they said that. Now we are reaching out to the college educated. Yeah. We don't have to be so specific in brimstone teaching anymore because we are talking to the educated people. Years ago they were all dumb and sitting down in the pews, but now they are all aware of things and they seem to need more preaching than ever. Yeah, that's right. Education doesn't do it. No? Got to be spirit-filled somehow. That's my feeling. Have the church changed now since you were a little boy in Rock? Yes, of course. And the whole Lutheran church, the cotton fields. Yeah, it has changed. It's not the simple type of approach that it used to be. Was it more tradition years ago they kept the people to come into the church? They knew they were coming into the same church. There weren't so many activities. There were not so many attractions. There wasn't TV. There wasn't football. There wasn't all these different things. Golf. So they could relax more and think about it that they came home from the church then. Yeah, they had more time. No football games to turn on in the afternoon. Not even newspapers. So that's probably the whole difference. There's too much. Yeah, I think so. I think so. I think we have... We try to get people to do things down at Morningstar, and their priorities are not that kind of priorities. They have other priorities, other things. They're busy with other things. So there was a simpler life years ago when your dad and mother went to church. Yeah, and whether or not they were more Christian or not, I don't know, because they just didn't have anything else much to do. Did your parents hear you speak or preach? Your parents? Did what? Did they hear you preach in church? My father heard me. My mother died when I was only 15. But my father has heard me preach. What did he say then? Did you talk like a good Swedish minister? He never said anything about that. I don't know why. He never told me that he thought I was any... one way or the other. I think he was too biased. He thought I was very good, like we think about our son. Well, he was probably proud of you, though. Oh, sure. Yes, he was. Yeah, sure he was. So you belonged then to a family of preachers. Yeah, I had two uncles that were pastors. I have a cousin who is a pastor, and I have my son who is a pastor. Where it goes from there, I don't know, because there are no spongs that are going to come along, because there are no spongs by that name now that will go that way. And my son only has daughters. So they came from a soldier family in Småland. Yeah. And they were spelled with an O then in Swedish, spong. They must have been S-P-O-N-G. Yeah, they must have been. So each generation has taken steps in the educational field. But I was the first one of the whole relation ever to go to college. I was the first one, because there were cousins that have gone since then and been educated. But it just didn't happen down there. Of course, my uncles did. They went to school. They got their education. Did the boys in your generation go to college, or did they stay on the farms? They stayed on the farms. Most of them did. And a lot of them didn't have the means. And other kind of work. They didn't have the means in many cases, I suppose, to send them. That's true. And they were needed also to help out. Neither did I. I didn't have any support from anybody. I had to work my way through the whole way. No support from anybody as far as pension. It's not possible today, though, for a young guy to work his way through college. Yes. Yes, there is. He may not be able to continue every year to go on, but he can do it. But now with the tuition of $10,000 and living expenses and everything, and I pay only $3,045 an hour for the media job. Most of our schools today, Gustavus is about $11,000. Our Gustad is about the same. Bethany is a little less. And our granddaughter who goes to Brown, this year it's $18,000 for her. It would be impossible for her to wipe dishes, I tell you. She works in the library now, but her parents are both working, and they are also borrowing money, student loans, for her to go. She has good grades, doesn't she? Oh, yeah. But what will happen now when the grandparents of this generation, they are the recipients of pensions and Social Security. The next generations now with less input through Social Security, will they be able to support the grandchildren with college education? Well, I... In the 2000s, something is going to burn here. If you say grandparents support the grandchildren... I don't remember supporting the grandchildren. But I don't believe in that. You don't think so? I don't believe in it for the simple reason that there is never enough that you can give to somebody who gets. I believe that they must be responsible and live within their own means. That's my philosophy. It's hard for our children to do that, but I say that's the way it has to be. Because we can't help them that way. I can't possibly do enough. We do a little, but not enough. It's never enough. You know that. But don't you think the grandparents feel that they should help them and make it a little bit easier for them? Because it's a hard study program they have. I don't know why I really don't. They probably do it, though. Yes, there are those that do. But is there ever enough? No, of course. Anytime they stretch out their hand, they want more. They want more. And they want a car when they're in school. And they want all kinds of things when they're in there. I didn't have anything like that. Not that that's wrong, but that takes money. You had a different philosophy, though. You were brought up in an environment you could reason with practical outlook. Sure. Today they don't do that because everything is certain. I know. I know. And I think it's a bad thing. I really do. Well, I played golf last Monday with a young man who graduated from UNO. He's finished university now, 23 years old. He can't get a job. He's got indebtedness. He's got plenty to work for. But he is working at Baker's, I suppose, maybe for $3 or $4, maybe $5 an hour, or something like that. It's a tough time. It's a tough time, and I just don't know that we should stretch ourselves to the point where we have to educate everybody. It's probably overdone. It's overdone. But then all those small colleges will be in trouble. Sure. Because they have a faculty now of hundreds and 300 people. Well, I don't know the answer. Of course, they did the right thing to educate people. There was the baby boom. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Well, we need educated people. We also need workers. Yes, so they probably… We have a young man down here who has been waiting on our tables, and he's going to go now and work in another kind of job because he wants to earn some more money than what he gets here. And he doesn't want to go to school. His father wants to send him to school, but he doesn't want to go. So he doesn't have to go. He could do other things. There are people that really come along a long way. As long as they have a high school education, I think that's sufficient. For those who feel that they want to get into something else, trade or some other kind of business activity that they want to develop, they don't have to have an education for that. They're better off if they do, we think, but I don't know. Nowadays it doesn't seem to pay off in all instances because they are out of work. And those people earning so little money, they are not putting too much into Social Security. Do you know what I mean? That's right. If they continue 10, 15 years like that, there will be problems, 2010. Well, by that time, I'm not too worried. We've got to worry for the next generation. You might do. That's something else that I have learned in life. For me to think, what is it going to be like for me 10 years from now? I used to think that way. Well, you know, I've gotten there now that I worried about 10 years ago. You didn't plan then 10 years ahead of that. Oh, yes, I certainly planned. I had my Social Security. I did investing. I did all kinds of things at the time that I could do with the hope that by the time I got to where I am now, that things would be such that I could get along. Well, it's better than ever. Now, why should any younger people worry about what it's going to be like 20 years from now? Who's going to tell them? Who can tell? Nobody. So you live today, you plan the best way you can, do what you can. But everything is planned by computers nowadays. You push three, four buttons and you can have a project. But a computer only does what you tell it to do. No more. Well, that's right. You can put brains into a computer, but it's still man's brain working. It's what we make the computer do. That's all. We can estimate and evaluate and do all kinds of things, and 20 years down the line, it may be completely different from what the computer said. Well, you see now like Bethany College, Carl Svensson. Yeah. He had a vision. Sure. And there was art in the wilderness there in Smoky Valley. Yeah. And his vision actually took hold. Sure. And there's not many other places too, of course, but it's amazing how well it worked out and the people came there. And there was probably no return. It was one of the reasons they helped them because they couldn't go back again. I don't know how many years my uncle was president of the board at Bethany, Uncle Victor. It must have been, oh, I don't know. I would guess 15 or 20 years. He was there many years, I'm sure, because he was the pastor of it. But they had a tremendous worry, though, about the art. They struggled, struggled, struggled. They're still struggling. But struggling is good. It's good. When everything is painful, then it relaxes. I was on the community chest, we called it at the time, when I was in Gary, Indiana, on the budget committee and working with some of these agencies. And one of the agencies, I said to them, in fact, was visiting nurse associates, and I said, we wish we could give you everything you asked for. And she says, well, you'd spoil us to death if you did. Because if we get everything we ask for, then we don't struggle. And I think that we, that's what I'm saying about helping grandchildren with their school. They need to struggle. They need to know that life doesn't come that way. That's the way I feel about it. You can't hand things to people on a platter and expect them to come out right. That's my philosophy. But many will, I wouldn't call it suffer, but they couldn't go to their schools then if they have enough. So? So they have to take the next step. Sure, sure. You can't do everything you want to do. So if you don't get this, there's always an alternative. So they will shape a better person, do you think? Absolutely. I remember a Jewish friend of mine in Gary, Indiana, that said, the reason why the Jews have gotten where they are is because they've had to struggle. Be suppressed. Yeah. And this is why people go to church more in East Germany than they do in West Germany, because they have to struggle. They're depressed, they're oppressed. And when that happens, they seek other means, other ways. And oftentimes that's a better way than if it were given to them and handed out. What do the ministers say about the religion in Sweden? Do you get together and discuss it with Swedish pastors? Not a great deal. We haven't talked much about it. Because years ago there was always the Lutherans, the former Lutheran church with Hasselquist and Espen, of course, different than Sweden, a little bit more liberal. Right. And you know Christer Stendahl, you probably met him several times and know him personally. Christer Stendahl, when he was a professor in Cambridge, I was a pastor down in Brockton. He used to come out and help me serve communion, preached in the church where I was serving in Brockton, so I knew Christer pretty well. He lived in Nerik, didn't he? Yes, I think he did, yes. He's in trouble though in Sweden now. Is he? Yeah. He has different views, you know. Yeah, sure. Well, they wanted to make him archbishop, but they didn't. They were probably going to take the next step down. He's now, is it, bishop of the Stockholm diocese? Yeah. Yeah, I know Christer pretty well. So how was his views then compared to yours if you discussed them at any time? I always appreciated his messages and his views. I didn't think he was too far off as far as we were concerned in this country. However, the one thing he felt was that when we ushered people to communion, he didn't think that was necessary. They should not be herded like cows. He didn't like that? No. He thought it should be free. And of course, you've been to Sweden and been to churches in Sweden, I'm sure, to see how they come when they want to go. They don't. Yes. And you see, the old philosophy in Sweden was that if you went too often to communion, then people start to talk. What did he do wrong now? So maybe Christer Stenahl had that in his head. No, he didn't feel that way. But I mean going up to the table. They weren't supposed to be ushered up. Well, it's been changing the tune now. It's too often now. Some churches have it every Sunday. That's all right. Out in Illinois. Don't you think that's too often? I'm going to be teaching this class about communion in another week, and my position is, or our position as a church, is that the food that we get from God comes through word and sacrament. And sacrament is just as important as the word because it's part of the word. And so to receive communion often is simply a strengthening. We used to think that if you got it too often, we wouldn't think so much of it. We don't think that way anymore in the Lutheran Church. We're emphasizing more frequent communions. Our son has it every other Sunday. And I believe that it's good. When we really know what we're doing, but just to have it as a form, then it's no good. But to know the meaning of it, word and sacrament, how do we get fed in the soul? Through word and sacrament. That's the position that we take nowadays, and I believe in it. We used to think that if we had communion four times a year, that was sufficient. In fact, there are people who think if you go once a year, that's enough. I've had trouble with people who, I remember one man who came out of Norway. He was confirmed in Norway, in Norwegian, and he felt that he was never worthy to go to communion. So he never went. Well, as I say, I'm going to be teaching this. I've been working on it now. I'm teaching the baptism next Sunday and communion the following Sunday, a class of 50 people or more. And there we say communion is important in the sense that we get the body and blood of Christ, our sins are forgiven, we are assured of it. This is part of the doctrine of the Church that we have. I shouldn't be preaching to you. No, but it's interesting, I forget the views of the new Church. So you are in with the new Church then, in other words, what they are doing. Oh yes, I'm not, I may be 78 years old, but I don't think that I'm that old-fashioned. I try to... But some of the old-timers now, they feel that they are catering too much to the young people. You know, years ago they didn't change too much in the Church. There was 100 years and 100 years, there was the same for grandpa, children and grandchildren. Now, the last 50 years, it's changed dramatically. Every Church has done that, including the Roman Catholic Church. Why do they do this? Do they get more members, do they get to please them? Well, what hasn't changed? Shouldn't the Church be living today rather than attempting to live the way we did 50, 100 years ago? I mean, everything has changed. We used to think that 11 o'clock on Sunday morning, that was sacrosanct. We had to be... that was Church. Now we... That was the end of the interview with Reverend Spong, Omaha, Nebraska. End of interview.