 This is cassette two, continuation with Gladys Falk, Oman, Nebraska, 30th of September, 1987, cassette two, side one. So how did you see now the Swedish, the regular Swedish when you met them in Sweden, your relation or non-relation? How did they appear to you? They were, when I first met my cousin, Sveth Svarendal, he was not too, we were not too warmly welcomed. You could feel that? You could feel that. There was a a standoffish feeling and in visiting with him for several hours he came out and thought we were coming over there to get money out of him, which was very strange. My father when he passed away left a certain amount of money to his sister, Elvira, his deceased mother. So he probably heard about that when he was younger. Yes, and whether or not we gave him that feeling that we were there to visit, to get something out of him, but my husband reassured him that there was no thought of that. Interesting enough, when my daughter was at the University of Stockholm, my aunt Elvira, Seth's mother, would have Susie come over once a week for dinner. And Susie had her own little car, a Volkswagen she'd bought in Hamburg, and Seth became very smitten with her. He thought she was young and she was pretty and he was like about 50 years old at that time. And of course when she came into the house he would always offer her a beer and Susie would drink it with him. And then Susie said, they made me stay until about four hours after I'd had that beer so I would not be caught in my car with alcohol in my breath. But she said it was a very warm feeling they had for Susie because she had visited with him so many times and and Susie said it was a matter of seeing that she got a good meal. Susie had an apartment in Stockholm and this is one Christmas. Susie of course was with foreign students in this one particular class that she had. There were the Chinese and the Japanese and the African and so Susie said I am going to fix you Christmas dinner in my apartment. Her apartment was very small and she had no idea how she was going to fix a turkey but she went to the market and here we have modern Stockholm but she said when she went to the market to pick up this turkey it was more like a roasting chicken and not a turkey and she the butcher gave her the turkey or the chicken and she carried it home in her car but she had to walk from the butcher shop and here was this not wrapped or anything it was just she carried it by the feet the head was still on and no it had not been cut open and so and oh it also had the feathers up the feathers up so she came home to the her apartment and called me long distance and said mother what do I do with this thing and I said well you're going to have to pluck it. She said she stayed out out up that night for about five hours plucking that turkey or chicken. She they had no such thing as pumpkin she wanted to make pumpkin pie no pumpkin and of course they had lingonberries. During the cooking of the meal the landlord said she must have she must have spilled grease on the floor it was hardwood floors and Susie got this horrendous bill of having the floor all redone because she had spilled grease on the floor and Susie said I don't think I did I did that somebody else must have done that so we got this bill and we paid for it and when we were back in Sweden I said Susie don't you want to go back to your apartment and talk to this this owner of this apartment she says no mother she was she never was friendly she was always where's the money never that warm feeling that you'd think that a Swede would give an American to make her feel at home being that she was renting her apartment so that was her experience the we felt that the people in the hotels could have been warmer we stayed at the Grand Hotel and we were very coolly treated they looked at you like there was something wrong with us we were hoping to get that feeling of what my father had said in his childhood everybody was so warm and and wanted to be friendly but we did not get that feeling how about this was a Stockholm this was a Stockholm of course how about the rest of the yes we went to in Jönköping we stayed at a hotel oh speaking of Jönköping I have to tell you that as we we had our own car of course and a driver and as we drove down to Jönköping we came by the lake Vattern and I couldn't believe how large the lake was because my father had told us all those years that that we were growing up that we should learn to ice skate because when he was a boy he was skating across Lake Vattern well when we saw the lake we thought I don't believe what he said was true because it was such a large lake do you suppose he could have done that oh yes that was possible but it's a pretty good distance pretty good distance uh-huh he but it's Jönköping we loved it was a like going into a different town than these other towns that we had gone into people were open there yes I thought they were yes I felt they were and then we went up to a resort greens resort that was up north we loved that it was on a lake and this is where we'd like to go next and this is where Carl's family came from and Carl's father was a he came over here when he was young because of the same reason my father did because they were taking everybody into the service and the only livelihood that he could make was to take care of the animals and to take care of the animals and to take care of the animals and to take care of the animals and to take care of the animals and to take care of the animals and to take care of the animals and to take care of the lake and we discovered this fox fountain I think they called it and the original house that my the Carl's father lived in was still there and the caretakers that had this fishing resort lived there and that was interesting you know to see the old red stained wooden house well taken care of but Susie said when she was a student that she had a Swedish friend whose family had a home up north and they went up there several times on a weekend for in the woods and she said the one night midsummer's night I think it was they this friend of hers told her that after dinner they were to go out in the woods and she was to pick a flower that suited her fancy a pretty flower and go home that night without speaking to anyone and put that flower underneath her pillow and she could dream of the man that she wanted to marry well at the time she was going with a boy from Hamburg and we were hoping that she would not marry him because the fact that she would be over there in Germany and we would never see Susie again but she said that dream didn't come true thank goodness. No he was a German fellow? He was a German fellow. But how did she after she stayed a whole year in Sweden? A whole year in Sweden and she said her first Christmas this boy in Hamburg invited her to his house for Christmas and she said that they invited her to join in but before she joined in on the family she sat on the steps and she said mother never have I ever felt homesickness they were opening their presents and here I was in in this town of Hamburg and no family and she's the tears started coming down and I thought oh I don't know whether I can go through this or not and then they saw her sitting on the steps and they welcomed her. One little thing about Sweden too we always thought the Swedes were honest people when Susie was back in school I would send her a dozen pairs of silk hose she never got them and so we went to the postmaster here in Omaha and asked what happened to these boxes of silk hose oh they said well when they got to Sweden you had to declare what they were and they never reached her they silk hose was something very precious so he suggested that we send one pair at a time in an envelope and they would reach her sure enough they did but a box full it never got through customs. So did she learn to understand the thoughts about the Swedes had in their mind? Did they discuss politics often? Oh yes they did discuss politics. Were they critical about the United States for instance? Oh yes. Did she notice that? Yes very critical about the United States. And she had to defend? She had to defend and of course she had to defend the whole country and they one thing that impressed her because she was going she married a doctor and of course they always discussed this socialistic idea about the hill. She married a Swede? She married a Swede her name is Alstrand and of course we're all Swedes we isn't it strange? No but how did she get to meet him though? I mean well she was at the time we were building a big house in Omaha and the boy was digging dandelions in our yard and Susie would take him out Coca-Colas and he would say to Susie oh well why don't you send your sister you're the pretty one out to bring the Coca-Cola to me the next time and Susie would come in she's mother he doesn't like me. Well she married him you know it turned out that but she didn't go with him for a long long time. He was over here then? He was over here and then after she came back from Sweden then he called her and they fell in love which is wonderful but now we have a situation this is the first one this is a grandchild this Susie Olson who is looking for a political career she is going with a boy a Dartmouth boy and he is in Chicago and he's Italian and she's very much in love with him so pretty soon we're going to have something else in the family besides Swedes I think. Were you told by your mother when you were so young though 12 years old you didn't have that experience how about your father now for instance did he tell you who to date? Yes I was dating a Polish boy at one time and he didn't agree because he was Catholic and he was Polish and so when I met Carl he approved very much because we went to the same church his mother and father came from Sweden and or his father came from Sweden and he approved. So the religion was the main thing? Yes religion was the main thing. Do you think they have fallen by the side now in our generation do they think about religious lines now? Oh yes I think even more so. It's still there? It's still there it's still there all of our children go to church every Sunday and their children go to church. But the Catholics now they have changed their thoughts of train of thought so to say over the years they were more different than the Lutherans for instance years ago than they are today they seem to be more liberal now the Catholics. I think they are. But do you think that makes a difference though like in this case now with your granddaughter here? I don't know. Do you approve of that because they are more liberal now? I don't know whether I'd approve and you know it will that's true of course they are Catholic the family's Catholic and the father is Italian the mother is Swedish though so that's the only thing that softens the blow you know if this would come to a marriage which of course we would have nothing to say about it he's a very nice young man and but it's strange how it so far we are thorough all the way down we're Swedish and we're Lutheran. But the generation has... But now you talk about the Lutheran church and you know we're seeing a difference in the Lutheran church. You see more Catholicism in the Lutheran church perhaps? Yes I said I've said so many times we're becoming more Catholic than we are Lutheran. That is interesting how they can turn it on like that. Yes. Like your parents would never approve of the Lutheran church today then you don't think? I don't think they would I really don't think they would. Because you have gradually grown into it. Uh-huh. Well I can go to church now and the the ritual has changed it's changed so very much. How do you feel about this cross of the sign sign of the cross? I don't know I don't think we need that I don't think we need that and we went to Kusum Royal Church not too long ago for communion and... This was your old church? This is the old church I've gone there since I was five years old and that's a long time. This communion we always would go and go to the rail and kneel down and he would pass the bread and the cup and then they would say a blessing and you would you'd kneel and you'd meditate and you'd ask God for the forgiveness of your sins and it's like a a factory line now. They get you in there's not a blessing there's nothing said it's not being served by your minister it's being served by acolytes or younger people which is fine they need to get that into the church I mean the younger people but you don't have that feeling of reverence and when we first went when I was confirmed when we had confession we knelt we knelt in the pews and of course they they gave that up because most of the people couldn't kneel you know it was arthritis. Do you think they gave it up? I don't know I think maybe it was but there's something about it's lost its reverence it's more or less a formality and it I just feel that I go into this our customary church and the memories that are there and of course it's the same as it was when I was five years old but it's not the same. Do you believe that like your parents and also your grandparents on your mother's side their church and your church you were brought up in there was very very much alike there wasn't too many changes happening that's true you remember the Psalms you remember the hymns yes yes do you think their tradition is the most important thing I mean you feel at home better I think so because during your lifetime a tremendous change has taken place that's true that's true this is usually because of the young people demand changes yes all the people change just because of the young people are lazy that's a thought that's a thought you wonder if it's the young people or is it the young ministers what they're teaching in the seminars seminaries it's coming from there yes it's coming from there the hymns aren't the same but they are usually 20 years ahead than the congregation well that's usually already to take too much change I can't even sing the songs I mean the the beginning of the service because it is so well it's high pitched and it's fast and it just doesn't have that meaning you know I mean glory to God in the highest is something that's it's rattled along and it's it's just like uh well it has no no importance anymore it's just like you're saying a chant how about communion you know the young people serve yeah I've served now and but years ago there was a philosopher among the old Swedes that if you went to communion too often you were really a big sinner and they would never do that now it's every Sunday in some churches what is it well uh that's true of course the Catholics we have us four times a year at Coosamorio four times a year and we do not have a communal cup and we have the little glasses it's become I served on the Coosamorio women's board for a good many years and we would prepare the communion and we would boil the glasses afterwards and we would prepare the table and and now and it was all on beautiful wooden little trays now it's gleaming brass trays that look so garish on the altar and and it just it has just seems to me like it is not it's trying to do something that wants to make it look glamorous and I don't think we need that so four times a year four times a year there are many but there are many Lutheran churches over every Sunday I that's true that's true now I think there will be uh it's just like you said a factory line I mean it's just like an assembly line really assembly line you come in one side and and they they hand it to you and then you just walk up the center aisle and you're supposed to go back to your pew and do the meditation and of course it does move the the the congregation fast but we always got through at the same time it seemed to me uh that we didn't need that the the fact that the minister would always bless us after we'd had communion now there's none of that and of course we have lost um our minister we were oh we just loved our uh Dr. Walter Traub and Paul DeFreeze they were because they had ministered to us through our illnesses and our deaths and um um and our spiritual needs and now it you don't have that I mean it just doesn't seem to me like they they minister to the congregation they present a sermon yes but the rest of it is lost you have the Lutheran then the Lutheran magazine yes I'm saying one I noticed last month they said that they are not reaching out for evangelism for each person anymore no what do they mean I mean that was the basic from the beginning to have missionaries going out to get new souls I know I know they don't seem to care about that anymore what do you know that's true well uh the basics of that was we we kind of grew up with that uh there was a Meta Blair our missionary and and she would send to the church uh bits of lace and we'd buy the lace and and then we'd send money back to Meta Blair to take care of these people uh we've lost that we don't have missionaries anymore and you wonder if it's because of the evangelists like uh Falwell and and Swaggard yes and they're they're over there but um it we don't talk about that anymore you're right you're right changing times that was the end of interview with Gladys Falk, Omaha, Nebraska and we have the 30th of September 1987. End of interview.