 Now, we have April 6, 1987. I'm sitting together with Mrs. Jan Cook in Rockford, Illinois. She was born 3rd of January, 1919, in Rockford, Illinois. Your grandfather, now, that was Sven August Johnson. Right. What do you remember of him? He came here 1855, I believe, from Sweden? Two– Fifty-two? Yes, April 52. April 52. He was one of the organizers of the first Lutheran church. Yes. What do you remember of him? You were not too old when he died, though. No, you see, I was very young then. But the grandma you remember? Yes, I remember her better, and I remember their house. I see. And I guess I think I remember him because I've seen his picture so much. Do you remember if Grandma spoke Swedish? Most of the time. Oh, I think she spoke Swedish, of course, but I don't think she– I don't remember that Swedish was spoken that much. I mean, I think she spoke good English. Because she was young when she came here. Yes. She came from Chicago, 1883, if I recall right, from some of the sources I had in the church records. Did you live close to Grandma? Not too far away. Not too far. Where was D'Antoine Rockford? Well, the Near East Side, I guess you'd call it. Near East Side, yeah. So your father was Linus Johnson. That was the son of– The youngest son. He was the youngest. What kind of work was he doing, your father? Well, he worked for many years with the Heddorf Piano Company in Rockford. Heddorf? I see. Was he in the management? Yes, he was– treasurer, I think, was what his– Sales manager. I see. Secretary and sales manager. He was with that company till 1940. Was there a company that also your grandfather was engaged in, invested in? Like your grandfather, he was one that organized his first Rockford furniture companies together with John, or– Yes, of course, my father was in the clothing company, S.A. Johnson Clothing Company for a while. So he was a tailor and actually from Sweden. Do you remember if– The grandfather was. I mean, that's what he did when he first came to town. But later on in life, he didn't pursue that line of tinkering, though. He went into business of furniture and investing in different companies. You mean S.A. Johnson? Yeah. Well, he was in the furniture company, but I was too young, I think, to know too much about that. I have a cousin that could probably tell you more about that. Otherwise, I'm trying to go through this book quickly here and see if I can find it in here. Well, here, his business. The Erlander Johnson in tailoring. And then I think he bought out Erlander. And it became Johnson-Wandstrom. And S.A. Johnson retired in 1912, and after that, he did some pressing and repair work at home in order to keep busy. So he was instrumental in organizing the Central Furniture Company and was its president as long as he lived. He was also a stockholder in the Starr Furniture Company, Royal Sewing Machine Company, Third National Bank, and treasurer of the Swedish Building and Loan. His children, did they go to, after high school, did they go into business college or college or any sort of, like your father, for instance? No, well, my father was a carpenter. Like your father, for instance? He may have gone to a little business college, but I'm not sure about them. I think, now, Maud, my father's twin sister, of course, went to college and became a teacher. And as I say, she was a principal and an elementary supervisor. There's the one that have a name, School After. School After, right. But without checking all these families, I really don't know whether... Well, and I hear it said, Maud and Linus entered high school with the class of 1900, but Linus finished only two years. And then he went to work in the Central Furniture Company and the Rockford Mantle, which I guess was a furniture company, too. And then he went into Heddorf Piano Company. The other sons of S.A. Johnson, did they stay in Rockford or did they move away? Victor, the son Victor moved. He was in Ann Arbor, Michigan. Now, his daughter is somebody that I think you would probably get more information from than me, she's a little older than I am and would remember more about his. Her name is Camilla Johnson. He was in... This is Victor, Vice President of Barrett Products, Monroe, Michigan, and then Woodall Industries in Detroit. And he had lived in Rockford for a while, but moved out of town, apparently, well, in the 1920s, I guess. Like your father, now, did he visit Sweden? No, I don't remember really that any of them did that I can remember. You can't remember if there were any contacts with, or was any contacts with the relation in Sweden. They were probably one of the grandparents that kept them. Well, now you see, my father was so much younger than some of the older ones, and some of the older ones may have kept up, but I don't think they really ever traveled back and forth in those days. There was no Swedish-speaking family in your family then? Oh yes, my parents, they all, I think, could speak Swedish, but they all talked good English, too. They all learned English. So they never... Well, of course, they all went through the Rockford school, as you see, the children. So I can remember my parents, and I thought when I had children of my own, it was quite a neat deal that when my parents wanted to say something, they didn't want us to understand. They'd say it in Swedish, you see. So you never learned Swedish then? No. Was it often any Swedish in high school when you... Not really. I think it was a little later, a little bit, but oh, I can remember, I think my sister and I went to Manulutheran Church for a while because they were still having Swedish at First Lutheran, but then later on we went back to First Lutheran. So you were confirmed in... I was, no, I was... No, I was confirmed at First Lutheran. And that was in... So that's when my sister and I were quite young. We were in Manul for a while. For Sunday school. Mm-hmm. So they were still in Sweden in the early 20s, or late 20s also, I suppose. I think so, mm-hmm. Your parents, they were First Lutheran members. Yes, mm-hmm. Did all of them stay with First Lutheran? Of S.A. Johnson's children? No, some of them went to Emanuel. And... A.J. Anderson, who was married to Cora, when I was very little, there was... I can't quite remember. Roberta Lindley would be able to tell you about that, but there was something at First Lutheran when he was excommunicated, and they had lawyers, and they went down to Augustana to see... I forget now why it was he was being excommunicated. But they got lawyers and they fought it. So then the upshot was he went over to Emanuel Lutheran, and that family has stayed there ever since. But then, of course, some of the others, the Ada Christensen married a minister and went into Chicago. No. In Chicago? No, Ada married Carl Christian, who was a Lutheran minister. They were in Chicago. But the Armour Johnsons stayed at First Lutheran, and the Victor Johnsons, of course, they were out of town more than when I remember. August Peterson's family, now they were at Emanuel. Now I don't know why they went to Emanuel. Maybe it was because of the language. There was probably for the children to understand or have the interest in Sunday school that was kept in Swedish. Confirmation, perhaps. It may be. Like your parents, did they belong to any– they belonged to First Lutheran, but did they belong to any Swedish organizations? No, they didn't. I don't remember whether any of the others did or not. You don't remember going to any picnics. There were a lot of Swedes. No. I know there are still some around town, but I don't remember them from– They were not interested. Doesn't seem like it. You went through high school and then on to college, too? Yes. What college? I went to Iowa State. Iowa State? It was Iowa State College and State University now. How many children were you in your family? How many sisters? I just had one sister. Just one sister? She went to college, too, then? Yes. She went part-time to Wisconsin, but then she graduated from Rockford College because about that time my father died and she stayed home. So you became teachers then after– I did. I was a home economics teacher in the Rockford school. She went into– She worked on the local newspaper for a while and then worked in Chicago in advertising and public relations. She was with Marcia Fields for a while. Then after her husband came back from the service, they moved out to Seattle. He died subsequently very short from there. He died very young, but she's still out there and still in that kind of work. So you followed in your aunt's work then? Yes. So she stayed in the Rockford school system for how many years? Forty-five years? Well, it was a good many. As a principal for several years? Yes. Was it elementary school or high school? No, she was in the elementary. She started teaching, it says here, in 1902. Now she may not have had any training– No, here, when she became a teacher, she didn't have any preparation beyond her high school work. And she went to the old– She taught at the old Freeman School and became principal of that. And then she retired in 1948. So that was 1902 to 1948, so 46 years. So you remember her as a teacher? Oh, yes. Did you have her in the– I didn't have her, but a couple of my cousins did. She was– Well, she was at Freeman School, and I didn't go to Freeman School because we– Who was educated in Rockford? It's no longer a school. The building is there. It's got offices in it. It hasn't been a school for a number of years, but it's– like on 6th Street and– Oh, that one-way street that runs into 7th Street would be about 2nd Street or something. It's just off of 7th Street. And–but she– It goes on to say that she took correspondence courses and earned two degrees of the University of Chicago, received a Ph.D. I don't know what that is, and then a master of science degree when she took over as a supervisor. So she really taught and then became– and then got her education afterwards. So she was well-known in Rockford. Oh, yes. Now, she visited Sweden, it said here, especially enjoyed going to Wing and Kumla, the birthplaces of her parents. I thought maybe she had, but I don't know that any of the rest of them ever did. So she was probably the only one then. Could very well be. And then in 1952, you had your 100th anniversary of your parents coming– or your fathers. Grandfathers coming. And–I mean, grandfather. And you had a booklet prepared. Was it a big doing then? I mean, you all come together? Oh, yes, we had– Oh, I think there were about 125 altogether then. We've had another one since then, 25 years later in 1957. And we're even more then, of course. But we didn't go into another book, but we did–we are working on– we have a family tree here, too. We've now got a new update of that. Where are they located, roughly, now? Well– In this area or in the Midwest? Well, of course, a lot of the younger generation have moved all over the country. They go to college in different states and they maybe stay longer? Yes, but a good many of them were here. Do you have a special historian now for doings like this? Well– Sending out the invitation to get people together? Well, this cousin I mentioned, Roberta Lindley, pretty much does that. And she would be– I don't believe she's back from Arizona, but she would be a bigger help to you than I am. She spends the winters in Arizona. Well, most–this winter, anyway, yes, she has. But she should be back pretty soon, I think. But I don't think she is yet. But also my older cousin, Camilla, is–she's one of Victor's daughters. And she's a retired schoolteacher. And she could probably tell you a lot more than some of these things, and I can. Your father, now, he was the head of PNU all the way up to his retirement? Did they close or sell out the head office? Well, it burned down at one point. And I think whether that was– He did a few other things. But he died fairly young. He was–by then, he was retired, but he died when he was only 59. I can't remember. He was associated with the– That's right, it was sold in 1940. And then he did go into a couple local businesses for a time. But... Basically, most of the time, I remember him working with it at our piano. During the Depression, was he able to keep working? Yes, they did keep working. That was an opening. How about you now, during the high school years? Was it easy to get a job during the Depression? Or you remember the hard years? Well, like I say, he always worked. So I know things were cut back considerably, but I was young enough during the heart of the Depression, and by the time I was ready to go to college, I went one year to Rockford College, and then I went away for three years. So things had picked up enough. Because, you see, by then, that was– During the war years, you went to– No, I graduated from high school in 1936. Oh, I see. And graduated from college in 1940, so... You know, things were better by then. And then you got a teaching position here in Rockford. I only taught a couple years, and when my husband and I were married– At that time, married teachers couldn't teach, you see. Was there a written law, or was it just that– No, I think it was a written law at that point, and then they thought the men teachers who were married needed the jobs, and– But then, you see, that was just– It's about the time of World War II. Well, then, I think with the coming of the war and the men going away, why, they got rid of that rule. So it was easier for the women to get into– Mm-hmm. I think that was a rule maybe that went in during the Depression, because I know I had a couple teachers that had been married, but they may have put that in during the Depression. So they had to stay away from either marrying or teaching? Mm-hmm. For a time, anyway. My cousin Camilla could probably tell you more about that, because she was in the school system at that time. What did people say about that? I mean, the teachers, or was it a stupid rule? It sounds like ridiculous, though, but I suppose it was to protect– It was to protect the men teachers, as I understand it. Journalistic ideas. Yes, that's right. Well, of course, we weren't as fired up about women's rights and things in those days. Anyway, so I suppose they figured if the woman teacher was married, she had a husband to support her, and one wage earner was enough at that point. So– That was the idea of the day. Well, they wouldn't get by it today, no. How about the customs now of your grandparents? Have you kept up a Swedish idea, like food and– Oh, a little bit. Not necessarily. Is there a vibe through the church, some of that, you think? Like smorgasbord and rice pudding and lutefisk? Well, I'll tell you, lutefisk is kind of dying out. I've got one son, and he and I are the only two. We used to have this whole– You like lutefisk. Yes, I do. And this whole family used to get together for Christmas Eve every year, and also Christmas breakfast. And we always had lutefisk. And I don't remember so much smorgasbord as some families do, but we did have family gatherings. And then we always had a big 4th of July picnic. And that's when we had the two reunions was 4th of July, because we always had a big family picnic. In the summer? Yes. Was they out in the park then or somewhere? No. This Mrs. A.J. Anderson, who was Cora, she lived on Kishwaukee Street, and there was a big lot between her house and the next one. And that's where we always went for 4th of July, you know, all through my life. They had a big house, so– And there was American dishes that were served– Basically, yes. I don't think there was as strong a feel for Swedish food and Swedish customs in our family as I know there are and were in– friends of mine with Swedish backgrounds. Of course, all the children were born here. Has there been any context, obviously, in the relation, second cousins and– Not that I know of. I don't know whether there had been back, but I don't remember of hearing any particularly. So, they more or less died off than with the first generation? To my knowledge. Whether my older cousins would remember any of that or not, I don't know, but I have thought it was strange that nobody in all this family, with the genealogy being such an interest for people nowadays, that none of them that I know of have really gone back to Sweden or tracked down anything. This one cousin was going to be over, but they couldn't find on the map in Sweden that they had where this place was. It's a small place, both of them. So, they put an end to that search? Yes, at that point. How did they marry? Did they stay with the Swedish people, the first generation, like your father? He married– Yeah, Alice Johnson. She was Swedish, yes. A number of them did. Now, Victor's wife was not. But I would say, by and large– I think probably Victor's wife was probably the only one that really didn't have a Swedish background. But the rest of them had some Swedish– Yes. And, of course, I think a lot of their contacts were First Lutheran Church. How did you meet your husband? He has an English background, I suppose. Yes, well, he was born and raised in Freeport, but then he came to Rockford when he finished college. He worked in Rockford, and then I met him. As a teacher? No, no, he was at Barbara Coleman Company. Oh, I see. So, that's how I met him. Met him? And you haven't been to Sweden, a visit? I have just been there very briefly, and then the only place we got to was Stockholm, so I can't say I really visited Sweden. That was a little bit too far from Ving and Kumla. Well, we just– It was a bad time of year. My husband used to go to England on business almost every year, and I'd go occasionally, and so one year we just took a brief trip. We had stopped in Norway and Sweden and Denmark after his English trip, but it was in March or something, and it wasn't the greatest time to go traveling around, and so that's really all I have seen of Sweden. So, you have another reunion coming up then, the next– Well, that depends on the next generation. No, I don't know. We had– one in 77. No. Yeah, 77. And they had a small one in Chicago last fall. One of the families is moving away, and they got quite a few of them together, but not like an organized– So, you were able to get hundreds of people together, though? Well, I think– Well, they weren't all from this area, but the one in 77, like I say, was about 160 people, and they came from– Oh, Florida and Seattle and New York area. Some from Texas, some of the young ones from Texas. So, the young ones, do they understand the background of a reason, a gathering like this? Do they tell the story of the– Well, they seem to be, at that point in 77, a lot of the young ones seem to be very interested in it, and all of the direct descendants up to the age of my children each have one of these books, and they all really kind of hang on to them. Now, my grandchildren don't, but they've– Now, like I say, we've just updated the family tree, and so all of them, the grandchildren and whoever has one of those now, the direct descendants. So, this– All they have to do is to continue because the beginning is already made. Mm-hmm, that's right. On these reunions now, what kind of food did they serve? Well, we had about the same thing every time, and for the Fourth of July, for the big reunion, we had our regular Fourth of July menu, which we'd had ever since I could remember, which was what we called chicken pudding. It was a chicken and rice pudding, and rye bread, and I think green beans or something, but then cherry pies, and for many years, we picked the cherries from– at Korov– There was a big yard. Yes, uh-huh. Big cherry tree. So, chicken pudding and cherry pie, that was the standing– That was the standing thing. The rye bread, was there home-baked? I think it was originally, but I don't think they always did it. Did your mother bake the home-baked rye bread? Was rye bread used widely at that time? Was the white bread more when you were growing up? Well, we had a lot of white bread, but I know we always had rye bread at Christmas with our lutefisk, and they fixed Korov, and a lot of those things, lingonberries and things at Christmas. Did you dump the bread in the pot? No, I've never done that. No, I just have heard of that. I don't know. I don't think it was something they did in our family in my time, anyway. How about potato sausage? Do you remember that? Or sausage of any kind? Well, we did have sausage, but my mother– Well, my mother did make it way back, but we'd have that for Christmas breakfast, I know, quite a bit. How about Christmas tree? Was it taken in fall at the time, or just in the same week of Christmas? What was your question? Dressing the Christmas tree? When was it brought into the house? Well, I don't think we followed particularly– We did it before Christmas sometime, but not Christmas Eve, necessarily. Was it a fir tree or spruce? Spruce, I think. Mm-hmm. And– Live candles? Not that I– Not in my time. I think– We were just reading my baby book that I'd been cleaning out the basement, and I forget whether it was mine or my sister's, where– I think it was mine in 1920. No, it was my sister's. Whichever one of us. The Christmas of 1919 or 1921, the big deal was that we had electric lights on the Christmas tree, so I don't remember candles. So there was the early then electric light? Mm-hmm. Were they kind of dim, or there was light in the outlet? There was no transformer? At that point, I don't remember. I just grew up with lights on the Christmas tree. How about Santa Claus? Oh, yeah. Mm-hmm. Did he arrive on Christmas Eve or morning? Well, we hung up our stackings on Christmas Eve, and he'd been there during the night. This is side two, this continuation with Mary Powell and Cook, Rockford, Illinois. Side two. And all on Christmas Eve when I was growing up. And then we went to Yuletide and did one of the ants for Christmas breakfast, usually after that, for many years. And then I suppose... And that was the end of the interview. Due to an abrupt ending, visitors have come, and so it will be the end of the interview with Mary Powell and Cook, Rockford, Illinois.