 This is cassette two, side one, continuation with Gilbert Pearson, Moline, Illinois. Cassette two, side one. So he had his own idea about unions. He didn't want to join them back in the... Well, I wouldn't stress that too much, but I know that he wouldn't take that job because he hadn't been a union man, so he told me that later on, and I didn't know that at the time. And he came back here, and then he started right back down at the Moline plow again. And he worked there for quite a while. The reason the union came in so late here in the Quad Cities, they didn't get the foothold until 1942, 43 or something. No, no, no. He never... Was that because John Deere, International Harvester, were such strong companies that... I don't think they really tried to hold them out, but there just wasn't any... I don't know what the reason was. I don't think there was any big anti-union. It was just the fact that this area hadn't been organized that much. I don't believe there were any... If there were so many thousands of workers, there would be a tremendous back... Except for the Rock Island Railroad. They were highly unionized because they had a big strike out there in the 19s and 20s. But John Deere and the rest of the factories, they... They came in later. They came in later. Yeah. So maybe they were afraid then for the management, the workers, if they'd lose their jobs, if they'd jiggle around too much with the union guys. You have to admit that the management probably had a little hold on these people, too. And it wasn't all fun, you know. They would work eight and ten hours a day, you know, and then in the summer months they'd be laid off. They didn't have any control over that. Which later on, the unions stopped that kind of a thing, see, and spread it out. And that's the thing that was all right. But the fact that you couldn't go in and get a job unless you belonged to the union, a lot of people didn't like that either, see. And I think that's what held them out for a long time. But later on, it was a different story in the 40s. Late 30s, then they came in, you know. So I don't think my dad was an anti-union man, but he was just a hard worker, and he wanted to give a fair day's work, you know, for his wages. What about insurance? If he got sick, for instance? There wasn't any. No? Did he belong to any other Swedish organizations? He belonged to the Vikings. And he had their insurance, so when he got sick, he got some of that. In fact, when he passed away, I think there was probably some kind of a benefit there too. He wasn't really a staunch member, but he belonged to them. I think he started that. In fact, he also belonged to this, what do you call them, the Oddfellows? Is that something else? Yes, the Olive Lodge down there. He called them Oddfellows. Yeah, they're Oddfellows. They call it the Swedish Olive Lodge. Okay. I think when he came from Sweden, a lot of the fellows belonged to that too. But later on, I know he belonged to the Vikings. It's not this present Vikings, but it was the one downtown. Down in Fort Avenue. He was a member, and he had their insurance. Because I know those people came up to see him when he was sick. How about your mother? Did she belong to any of those? No, just the church. They were members of the Bethany Baptist Church. There was no insurance group within the church? No, no, no, no. So they were the only ones in case of sickness? Yeah, they didn't have these medical benefits that we have now. There was no such thing. So they were healthy most of their lives then? Yeah, my dad lived until he was 87. Although he had a little circulation problem. When he was 84, we thought, sure, he was gone. He lost circulation and his leg turned to gangrene and they had to cut it off. I couldn't believe that he'd come through it at that age, 84. He came through it, and within 10 days he was out of the hospital. He came out of it and lived about three or four more years. His heart was strong. There was no problem there. He had a will to live. My mother lived another 61 to another 22 years. She was about a month short of 100 when she passed away. That's in 82. How did she take this moving out to South Dakota, back and forth from the father? She told us later, we never knew it out there when we were kids, but she didn't like it. She was afraid. She was afraid of animals. It was all just a few steps away from the homesteading out there. It was, you know, 1909, how it was. You had to draw water from a well. There were no facilities at all, hardly. Then she raised six kids out there, so that was hard. She didn't come from a farming family in Sweden? No, they were in town, what she called middle-class people, the Bridenbriggs. They probably were mostly employed in that steelworks, whatever they called it. I don't remember what they called it. The yarn wagon, she called it. It was a hard life for her, but she worked hard. She got through it. Her brother lived. When she came over, my dad and she, in those days a young woman couldn't come over here by herself. They weren't married. Then her brother came with them, Carl. Two of them, two Bridenbriggs came. He either lived with us or with another family most of the time out there in South Dakota. He lived here for a while, and then he moved out to the Dakotas about the same time as my parents did. He worked for different farmers. Once in a while he'd stay with us. But then during the big flu epidemic, he was taken. Or 17, 18. It was the same, we had kind of a double one. It was in 2020, I think it was. It hit hard out there. It just hit every family. He passed away out there, and he's buried at Dale's Pooch out there. Carl Bridenbriggs. They were not spared out there either? No. It was more open. It wasn't the first epidemic. We called it Spanish influenza. It hit hard that year. It hit awful hard. His tombstone has 1920 on it. It had to be 20, February 20, 1920. But it hit so hard that they couldn't even facilitate the funerals. So it was a hard blow for your mother, I suppose. Yeah. It kind of was. I think she lost, it says in here that she lost three of her family in nine months. But they came back here, and then they lived here. And the day we came back here, I had finished grade school out there. And of course we lived in the country, so I didn't have a way to get to high school. So the day after we got here, my mother took me to high school, and I started high school. I was a half a year behind. So then that's the rest of our history was in Moline here. So then you went to high school there. I did, yeah. And your first job then was to... Well, my first job was still back down at the old Moline plow company. They changed the Moline implement at that time. And that course hit during the Depression, and it was off and on. I think I worked there three years solidly, and then it was just part-time. I worked four months of the year. What were they fabricating? Plows? Plows, all the farm implements. Plows, harrows. Combines? No combines here. No tractors? No tractors here. It was later when the Minneapolis Moline came in? Yeah. I think it switched three ways when I was down there in those three years. From the Moline plow, the Moline implement, to the Minneapolis Moline. That all happened in the few years I was there. And then in 1935, I quit and went over to the International Harvester, and I spent 35 years there. Oh, I see. And then they folded up in 1953, in the Minneapolis Moline. Yeah, that was a long time after I left them. I left them. So International Harvester, they were starting to... They just came down here at East Moline plant. They were in Farm Hall, but not at East Moline. They came in 1934. I got in on the ground floor there, more or less. But I was in the engineering department. I see. So you had nothing to do with the unions then? Well, we weren't unionized, because I eventually got on the management. But the unions, they were all right out. They got in right away. There were not too much problems then with the unions when they came in to the 40s? Not exactly. There was a strike or two, and they would make some demands, but it always worked out. Nothing big. I know there were some periods, I think maybe there was a month strike one time. Of course, we worked all the time, because I was on the other side of the fence. There was no problem in our department. But it always worked out. They said that the tool room operators at John Deere, they were very slow. They didn't want to unionize, because they thought they were in a different league. Well, probably so. I think the place where her father worked, I don't think they were unionized. He was in the experimental department at Deere Company. So that came in later. I don't really know too much about that, because they were treated pretty well. We were in the engineering department too, and we didn't have any problem. But the International Harvester was unionized probably in 1940 or so, and from then on. It grew for every year? It worked out all right. But it took a long time before all the workers joined. They didn't have to belong to it at first. Well, probably in other places, but at Harvester, that agreement was that you had a six month probation period, and then you would have to join. Was there a law or a requirement? Well, you remember when Roosevelt was in there, there were some laws passed favoring that kind of a thing, which was all right. Because prior to that, you could get hired and get laid off at any time. You didn't have any rights. And the unions, that was a good deal. They stuck up for your rights. But the workers, they didn't have to join the union if they didn't want to. There was no demand on them from the union at all. Not for a long time, but once they got in like East Moline, I believe, they had a clause in there that you could work six months before you had to join. Then you had to join. And if you didn't join, then you— Well, then you'd leave. I think that's the way it was. That is, by classification, see. It didn't apply to us. Only the ones who were— Well, later on, I was on management, so that wouldn't apply anyway, see. They weren't unionized. No, foremans and supervisors. No, yeah, no. But I was in the engineering department where we designed engineering. And that was growing every year? Oh, yeah. Big guns from 1940s and up. Yeah. And I think the same thing happened to all the plants, Deere and Company and Case and Caterpillar. The ag industry really grew for a long time there. Do you think it was a good competition to have so many in one— Well, I don't know. It just so happened. They called us the farm capital of the world, you know, or the farm implement capital of the— Of the world. Of the world, see. Because they had so many. They had International, they had Deere, they had Case, they had Caterpillar. Powell for a while. And what? And Minneapolis-Moline. Yeah, and Minneapolis-Moline, see. All five of those were here. Oh, and they were all big. Yeah. The corner of the market. So I'd say maybe probably 80 percent of the workers in the area were working in that industry, see. No. So there was good competition between IH and John Deere. Oh, yeah. Oh, sure. Oh, yeah. Did they follow the same line, though, with the combines and the tractors? Everybody— Don't put something turbo on it the next year and another one— Well, there was competition. Same thing like cars, you know. Everybody had their own line and line of implements and tractors. To make it better and more proficient. Yeah. What were the different nationalities now working together with the— Well, the Swedishness was gone when you started to work. Yeah, that was pretty much out of the picture. They didn't say that he was a Swede at that time or anything like that? Probably at the time my dad started at the Moline plow, there were really two nationalities, the Swedish and the Belgians. I think right in this area. The Belgians probably had as many as the Swedes. But I imagine they even spoke Swedish down there. I know they did. Is that right? When he started, because that's all he could speak. And a lot of these immigrants that came in there would get into these— either John Deere or Moline plows. Did they have a different job, the Belgians and the Swedes? Or did they all work together? They worked together, I think. So it was easier to be a Swede to get a job down there? Well— A lot of foremans were Swedish. Probably. Probably. Yeah, there was this fellow named Kronander. I don't know if you ever heard of him. Kronander, he was in the Karlmarks. They were the big wheels at the plow company. They were on the ground floor down there. Got in on the ground floor. But that was way back in the early 1900s. So the way of producing a machine or implement from 1900 to 1925, it didn't change too much? Well, in the early days, it was a lot of hard labor, you know. It was a lot of hand work. It was done the same way as it was 25 years earlier. Well, there were a lot of machines there, but they did a lot of heavy work, you know. And by the time I started down there in 1927, there were a lot more machines than there were when my dad started. When you started, they all had a big power plant, and it was run with several axes. Yeah, they had these line shafts. You don't have them anymore. Every machine's got an electric motor. But when did they come in, in the 40s? Yeah. So when the main belt broke, everything broke. Yeah. Yeah, you had a big central power plant that ran all these line shafts with a whole shop, these big belts, you know. And they had special men that would take care of those. Every lathe and every drop hammer and every bulldozer would run off those line shafts to come down and run those machines. So there was a noisy place. Oh, yeah, yeah. Because, you know, like I say, it wasn't easy in those days. And dangerous, too, I suppose, when all those belts— I suppose, yeah. Oh, yeah, that was dangerous, sure. That was dangerous. But that was the way it was done, and nobody thought of it. Well, that was—no, that's just the way it was. Progress, you know, it just progressed gradually until a lot of that became automatic, you know. So your father, when did he become a citizen? Well, I can remember that, and probably—he was a real patriotic. He wanted to get that right away. And you had to get your first papers and your second papers, the way I remember it. And I suppose it was during World War II when he got them somewhere in there. I don't know, because I've never seen them. I don't know what happened to them. So he didn't vote then before 1940s, you think? How's that? He didn't vote then before 1940s, or—? Oh, yeah. No, no, this is way back in the First World War. I see, First World War. Yeah. No, oh, no. He got them in the First World War sometime in there when we were on the second farm, I can remember. Because I remember him talking about his first papers and his second papers. And I guess you couldn't vote until he got those. Yeah. There were a lot of populists out there in South Dakota. They had what they called a— A populist movement. Yeah, they had another party out there. The rebels. Yeah. I can't think of the name. Was he a Republican or Democrat, your dad? He was a Republican. I don't know why I can't think of that name. I know it so well. There was a third party one time out there. I can't think of the name. Okay. Do you remember a man out in the Desperate Area that was called August Peterson? What did he do? What was he? Well, he was— He wrote the book, anyway, about the Swedes and the Norwegians out there. And he should have been around at that time. Well, I just can't remember him. I know a lot of Petersons out there. Was he a Lutheran or Baptist? Do you know? No, I really don't know. The Lutherans, there were a lot of Lutherans out there and a lot of Baptists. They belonged to the Danesburg Church. Yeah, we belonged to the Baptist Church. And the Lutheran Church was right there at Hub City. And then there was a Danish church just about a mile from our farm east of there. And the Covenry Church is up at Comstead. Yeah, we'd go to Comstead. And they had a Baptist—I think they had a Baptist church there, too. I don't know. But we went to Comstead. There was a free church up there. Maybe it was a free church. I remember going up there sometimes. Comstead. That was just a little locality. So that's—did you go to any different Swedish activities out there, or you don't remember? Well, every year they had this Midsummer thing, but that was at the Lutheran Church. Oh, they had that? Oh, every year. That was a big thing. Midsummer picnic. Everybody went to that. Well, the Baptist Church didn't have that. No, we went to the Lutherans. I know, but I mean, they didn't have any Midsummer festival. No, no, and the Midsummer festival was the Lutherans. That was a big deal. Oh, there'd be hundreds and hundreds of people there. Maybe the thousands. And in the afternoon, there'd be a big ball game, you know. Baseball game? Oh, yeah. The House of David or something would come and play the local team, you know. That was a big thing. Every year, we'd go to that. So then you were all united with the Lutherans and the— Yeah, there— —the Covenants and the Baptists. I mean, there was no—that wasn't that much different. I never— How about the Norwegians out there? Did you— There were Norwegians. Quite a few of them, and Danish also. We probably had a few in our church. I just can't remember who they would be. But I know the Danish people had a church of their own just a mile east of us. But I think that thing kind of folded up even before we left. I'm not sure, because there weren't that many Danes there. See, I think Mrs. Silkenson was a Dane, see. Yeah. Yeah. But they were probably— She went to the Baptist church, though. Oh, yeah, once she married Silkenson. Oh, okay. The Danish was probably more down at the Alsbergs. Als— The Alsberg Lutheran Church was— Yeah, there was another one—I can't remember the name—south of Greenfield, down towards—you know where Burbank is? Yes, I heard about that. Yeah. There was a church there. Some Danish. How about Christmas out there in South Dakota? How could you—were you able to get the Christmas tree? Well, we'd buy them in town and bring them home. Christmas was a big celebration. Yule-Lutte was a must every year, 5 o'clock in the morning. Sometimes we'd go, maybe the whole family, and— How about the Christmas tree getting decorated? Was it done long before Christmas or— Well— Shortly before? We probably had a little bit longer time than we do here. I just don't remember. Christmas would usually be celebrated, in our case, with our next-door neighbors. They had a family about our same size, and that was traditional. One year we'd be at their place, they were Lutherans. Next year they would be at our place, the Hoyers. And the last thing in the evening or before you'd break up would be dancing around the Christmas tree. That was the tradition. Christmas Eve? Christmas—I suppose it would be Christmas Eve. Did you get the Christmas presents on tour? Yeah, yeah. Instead of in the morning? No, evening. In the evening? Evening. But it was traditional. So you danced around the Christmas tree? That was one thing. It seemed like it came from my mother's tradition, or maybe my dad's. That was the last thing I'd do as kids with all—well, the whole family, parents and everybody. We'd dance around the tree. That was the last thing I'd do. All the young? Yeah, and sing. Do you remember if they had Santa Claus, or Jultomte as they call it? Well, not too much, not too much. I don't know that my parents cared so much for that. I'm not too sure. So Dad didn't dress up as Santa Claus then? Not during the early years. One time, the last year we were in South Dakota he did. The last year we were there. He tried to fool everybody. So he had a beard and— Well, he came disguised some way. Only once that I can remember. Only once. So your mother, she had all the different Swedish kallsylta and— Oh, yeah. Hedges. She made— Lutefish, too. Oh, yeah, we had lutefish. Every year he'd buy the bars and he'd treat it, whatever they— Well, Dad took care of that. Oh, yeah. In fact, he did that here in Moline until—in fact, he did it until he died. But we had that out there. And then she would make sylta, what do you call it? Syltust, ustkaka. You know what that is? No. Yeah. Well, you had to make that out of certain kinds of material, milk, you know, one of those. I forget which one it was. You had to rent it. Yeah. Yeah. And we had other Swedish dishes. Filabunk, you ever heard of that? No. I used to love that. She'd make that and we'd set it in the basement. We had just a ground floor basement, you know. Set it out there. I don't know how many days it stood. I used to love that stuff. But some of these traditional Swedish things that we had during the first—when we were out there, you know, before we came back here. Was it done more out there in South Dakota than here? Yeah. Yeah. I see. Yeah. Because the neighbors— Well, we were all grown up when we got here, see. The youngest one in the family was six, see, when we got back here. Six to— You were 14. I was 14. Six to 18, see. We were out there. Three of them were born out there and three out here before we got there. Did you have more get-togethers with the neighbors out there than you had here? Yeah. Right. All the time. All the time. One neighbor, the Hoyers, we were as close as this. And the next neighbor, the Lundbergs, they would come to our house and we would go to their house. This was traditional for Christmas and others on Sundays. And the other neighbors—you knew the neighbors. In fact, my dad knew neighbors for—must have been a radius of 10 miles. It seemed like he knew everybody. And you knew a lot more people than you do in town. He was just friendly with everybody. It seemed like you just knew them. And they made no difference if they were Lutherans or Jews? No. Not a bit. Not a bit. They all helped each other? Sure. So it was only on Sunday that you went to different places? I mean in the morning for service? Yeah. We were Baptists and they were Lutherans. But then you were together? Oh, yeah. Like that Sunday. Midsummer. That was everybody. At least the way I felt. Of course, I was pretty young then. But we were there. We were Baptists. And I didn't think anything about going to a Lutheran picnic. I thought it was all right. And then we had—sometimes we'd have Fourth of July picnics. And, you know, everybody would go to those. And like I said, my dad was real patriotic. And he sponsored one of these one year, just on his own. Oh, I tell you, he bought fireworks. You wouldn't believe it. And he invited everybody within 10 miles. And they came, you know, on a picnic at our farm. At our farm. Just hundreds of people would drive in. How did he advertise it then? I don't know. Just by word— Posters? I don't think there was posters. I think it was just word of mouth, more or less. And you know how the telephone was those days. You'd call somebody and there'd be three other people on the line, you know. But a lot of people came. And then at night, he'd have these big fireworks. This is cassette 2, side 2. So you had your mother recite the poem. Well, she—I don't know how it came about. She recited it one time. And it wasn't so far back, you know. We just decided, well, it's— How could somebody remember a poem from your childhood days? And I think she was in her 90s at this time. Probably 95. Turn it up. What? Put your voice down there. Now you're on. You're on. Start again. So pyntat och fint står det torftiga käll Oh, my. Start again. So pyntat och fint står det torftiga käll Och brasan hon flammar i spisens häll Mor sätter ljus ut i staket av trä Och lillebror han rider på morfars knä Far kommer hem med julklappar från stan Samt glitter och stjärnor till juligran Till syster en ducka det bästa hon vet Och dito och pojkarna var sin trompet Och granen hon kläddes det går som en dans Och snart står hon färdig i strålande glans Då hoppa och jubla av glädje det små Och morfar han sitter så nöjd och ser på Och mamma som alltid är älsklig och söt Hon dukar upp bordet med lutfisk och gröt En var tager för sig som hungrande gäst Och lillebror han äter med fingrarna bäst Att slutligt besegla den högtids och skön Man samlas kring morfar till aftonbön Sen skenda till vila både stora och små En var skall till julotan dagen därpå Och fridfullt och tyst står det torftiga käll Omgivet av ängar i julekväll She was always very proud of her heritage She thought Sweden was the greatest country She wished she had never come over here Well, she wanted to go back but she never went back And when she did her parents passed away Of course that left a little I just want to say A feeling of I want to go back now So she never went back Neither one of them ever went back So her brother stayed in the kelp and he died there? Yeah And the other brother died when she was very young? Well in South Dakota he was Did they really feel at home out there in South Dakota? It's so different, you know, the Vemron I think my dad did because he was a pusher He was so active so he didn't think about it But like I say the community was different You knew so many people, you know You were close to a lot of people, that's the way I remember it Families would know each other Even in school, you know The kids were in school, you'd know every family that had kids in school And that was from a large area How did you see it now? Did you have more friends in South Dakota than you had in Molina when you started high school here? I probably did, yeah Because I started new here from scratch You had a few friends then? Well to start with, yeah To start with Because I didn't know anybody here, I didn't know anybody But even after a few years? Well You had more friends you think in South Dakota? Because you grew up with them, see Here you spent four years in high school You didn't know a lot of people there But during the eight years of grade school out there you'd probably Because we would And we would also exchange Sometimes I would go to somebody's house And they would come to my house Like on a weekend or something But you'd never do that in town And we had baseball teams We started hardball when we were in sixth grade Organized You'd never see that in town here How about the church? Did you have many activities with the church in South Dakota compared to here in Molina? Did they organize any baseball games? Yeah, we had a baseball team in church, the kids in church Oh Well Well at a later point in life I guess they did Not as young as we did out there Because I'm only speaking for myself There were sports activities here too Not in the younger group really I don't think they played baseball here until they were 18 years old, you know 17 But that's different now of course Now they've got organizations, you know Juniors and seniors and adults Your mother, she belonged to the sewing circle up at the Baptist church in South Dakota Oh yeah, well they had what they called ladies' aid Was she more active there than she was here in Molina? Well when she came to Molina she was quite active She was active with her mother I mean this was before we knew each other, you know Because she fell into that same group They call it the ladies' aid Those were the Baptist women's groups And out there they would go, they would meet in the homes These women I remember coming to our house and we'd go to another place I remember taking her in a horse and buggy to these things Here of course they have it in the church Which is appropriate But I suppose that activity was about the same when she came here It's probably different now I don't know Midsummer, you didn't have any midsummer festivals here in Molina? Not church-wise, there was a city group that had a festival at the Pacific Park Like a midsummer? Yeah Was it called midsummer? Yeah, it was Maybe the first 15 years we lived here But it was sponsored by, I thought it was sponsored by the city And it would be at Pacific Park Was it sponsored maybe by that Swedish? Probably a lodge, probably a lodge Could be the lodge sponsored it And all the Swedish-Americans would attend There were big crowds out there, thousands and thousands But it disappeared Yeah, it faded out Of course they have one now, you know At Arsena? Yeah, that's the only one that I know of now That's a Swedish-American organization that does that We go down to that Once in a while, we haven't been there now for five years We haven't been, we haven't been always home at that time So you met your future wife then, Elsa Pedersen here in Moline? In our church, yeah Through the church? Yeah, that was I remember when they came to the church Yeah, well, why don't you tell about that now, and we'll see What you had to say about it Your side of the family They had projects, which were really big work projects, see And of course our family didn't qualify for a long time Because I think one member was working, our kid was working But then dad got on there for a short time And it was funny All they were doing was they were just making work for all these people, see They were cutting the hill down, just moving the hill over, see And it was just make work So they had their wheelbarrows and their spades and all that So the first day my dad got there, he started working Boy, he took one wheelbarrow after another He started, he could move the hill over, see That wasn't a thing to do He got into trouble right away The rest of them were standing there leaning on their shovels, see You were just going to get paid for doing that, see He couldn't see that I think he worked a week and, I don't know I think he quit or something He couldn't stand that He said, if we got a wheelbarrow and a spade here, let's do something So he was working like a man, you know But that was the kind of, that's the way he was, see So he didn't stay there too long then? I don't, now it wasn't very long He didn't do that very much I think he got another job He worked out of the city Was he in the city or was it outside the... No, he was in the city here They had the WPA projects all over Some of them were worthwhile, you know, they were building, building and stuff But for others, they were just making work And they got, I don't know, a very small wage Worked a few hours a week The flood wall in Bettendorf, there must be a WPA work, isn't it? I'm not sure about that I don't know about that There's some other, other ones too So he wanted something proficient on But he could do a lot of things No hanging on the showman One day, like I say, he liked to fish, you know So one day he came home with a whole rack of lumber He was going to build a boat He built two boats right in our backyard The most beautiful boats you ever saw Just from scratch, from what he remembered from Sweden And I remember a big... Fred Peterson and those guys came over They couldn't believe it He says, where are the plans for these boats? Plans? They were in his head, see, he didn't have any plans He built them right out in our yard First boat he built, he took them down and he had it down in Ferdinand's Somebody stole it And then he built another one He had it out of Rock River He liked to fish, see I'd take him out, we'd take him out about eight in the evening We'd stay all night, lay on the river and fish He'd trotline, you know And we'd fish by the bushels How about you boys now? Did you take after your dad? Did you have anything like building boats and fishing? No, not really that way No? Oh, I fished, but not like he did Not like he did But that was a different era, you know That was some of the things they did, I guess A lot of them did So he had plans to survive Yeah Even though it was hard times You see, he was in his late twenties when he came over here, see Probably So what year was he born? So you now, Mrs. Petersen, I was saying, Pearson You didn't change your name too much, though No, no From Petersen to Pearson That's right And you were born in Moline Right And your parents, they came both from Sweden No, my father came, but my mother did not My mother was born in Denver, Colorado Her father was a Swedish Baptist minister, Axel Cherland And she was born then in Denver And then, of course, they went to many different areas because of him being a preacher They were out in Boston He started a number of Swedish churches out in the New England area They were in St. Paul But my father came from Sweden He was 19 He was born in 1882, so he came over here in 1901 And he also landed at Boston And that's how he came to meet my mother Because he stayed in that area for a while And my grandfather was a pastor in Boston Then he was a pastor in Worcester My father was up there And that's how he happened to meet my mother And then he got on the train and came to Moline Because he had heard about John Deere You know, back there in those days, they had a saying that All these train lads that came out of Chicago to Moline People were not acquainted with the English language So they came and were on the train And they'd call out the name of the town that the train was going to stop at And then they'd call out, Moline! And nobody moved But if they said John Deere, everybody moved So that was an easy name to call Yeah, because that's where they were going To John Deere They were going to work for John Deere And my father was in the experimental department at Deere Plow & Company He designed parts Had made even some things that were patented Just like Gilbert did when he worked at IH Had he gone to a technical college perhaps? No, no, no Just from scratch? Just from scratch, just from scratch But he lived here then in Moline He went back home and visited his parents and sisters and brother In 1909 I think it was And then he married my mother in 1912 But by that time, my grandfather was a pastor in Worcester Not Worcester, Great Falls, Montana And so he had to go out to Great Falls to marry his bride And bring her back to Moline And the people here in Moline that went to the church There were a great many that were very disgusted with my father Because he had to go way to Montana to get a bride When there were lots of single girls here that wanted to get married That's right, that's all strange But from where in Sweden did he come now? He came from Dalarna Dalarna or the place? Yeah, Inchorn Inchorn? Yeah, Inchorn And that was in 19... 1901 1901 Yeah He came from a family of eight children There were two girls and six boys One set of twins So the family, they were baptized in Sweden then? Yes, they were, they were They were not... they did not go to the state church at all Was he the only one that came? No, no My... I had an Aunt Julia who was next to my father She came over here And she lived out in Connecticut And then both the twin uncles came And one of them served in World War I They lived for a very short time with us in our home And that's where I got a little taste of Swedish as a small child Because they came, they couldn't speak any English And my mother and dad talked with them in Swedish Because while my mother was born in this country She too couldn't speak any English when she started school Because they just spoke Swedish in their home In their home, yeah Yeah She went to school in Denver though? No, no They left Denver when she was a small child Yeah, was in school in St. Paul and out east Where they lived He lived... he was in various places Worcester and Boston and... Oh, some other places in Massachusetts I can't... Brockton Brockton, he was pastor in Brockton, yeah So your mother had to change school almost every other year? Well, not quite that often She would... a number of years, you know So then after being married in Great Falls, Montana They came... Yeah, they came right to Moline And one of the families in our church Their name is Becker They... Grandma Becker we called her She kind of took my mother under her wing And because she was a new bride She had no relatives here And they became our family like I mean, we had much to do with them The Francis and Ethel were both school teachers in East Moline And they... In fact, Ethel Becker took care of me When my brother was born And he's 15 months younger than I, two of the day And she took care of me And they came and did things at our house every once in a while So we became very close-knit friends But more like relatives, really So did they buy a house then, your parents? Yes, my father... When I was born, they were renting But then when I was three months They moved into a home Which is on the west end of Moline Third street between 11th and 12th Avenue Is where I grew up And then till I was 16 When I was 16, my father built... They had a new home built on 12th Street Not far from the old free church Down the block from the old free church And then you went to high school here? Oh, I went all through school here, right And what kind of work did you take then? I became a teacher You went to college then? Oh yeah, I went down to Western... Macomb? Down to Macomb And then I just had to go for two years, you know Then you could teach You had an Associate of Arts Yes And then you... I taught I taught four years Well, the first year I couldn't get a job Because they were scarce, very scarce That was back in 1933 You couldn't buy a job There were so few But they didn't want to... Have husband and wife work Well, of course, I wasn't married Well, you couldn't then either, but that was later No, but there weren't jobs available Because it had been the Depression, you see And nobody was leaving the teaching profession And so when I did... I was out a year And my father could not afford to send me back So that I could have gone on to school And I worked in family places Especially one for the Oscar Odell's He was a... Well, he owned this big lumber place up here That's now where the Supreme TV and so on is Right there, big building up And I worked for them But she gave me the privilege of going to substitute If I would get a call And so I did substitute teaching off and on During that period of time In Moline In Moline schools, right And then at the end of that year Oh, I think April maybe Or maybe it wasn't until the first part of May Because school continued until June I substituted the last six weeks of the school year Over here at Logan School on 25th And then all summer I hoped I would get a job But nothing opened And then the 2nd of August of that year A teacher at Irving School Which was down on the hill Burned up here a few years ago She died And of course all of us who were looking for jobs Were hoping that we would get her I was fortunate I was hired on the recommendation of the principal At Logan School who had observed me While I taught the last six weeks of the school year So then I started teaching And I taught four years And then I married Gilbert And then I was out You couldn't be You couldn't be married and No, you couldn't keep on teaching Just the law or just the setting I mean Moline, the school board had that rule Of course I had already been hired for the next year And somebody said well maybe you could have But no, I knew that I was out And so then after that I I did some subbing And I can see my mother yet She would walk down to our house We lived several, quite a few blocks apart But she would get the calls in the morning We were not that flush with money That we could have a telephone And she'd get the calls and she'd walk down to my house And I could see her coming And I'd know I was going to be teaching that day I see And then I taught The year before our son was born He was born in 42 And the year before he was born I taught for a teacher who was ill At McKinley School And I taught two weeks And then she came back And Gilbert and I had planned a vacation out east And then we came back after two weeks And they were on the phone asking if I'd come back They had had to open two rooms No, they had to have That teacher had to quit teaching And then they had to open another room So I worked all year as a substitute teacher For five dollars a day Because they wouldn't give you a contract Because you were a married person And no hospitalizations? Oh no, no And I worked just as hard as all the other teachers Of course when I started teaching Our salary was My salary was a thousand dollars a year Minus a hundred because they had cut back So I got nine hundred dollars that first year That was a hard day's work Were there lower grades? I taught in a fourth grade situation I had forty-two children Forty-two Five dollars a day Yeah, well no That's when I first started teaching Now, forty-two children I was making the nine hundred dollars a year at that time But when I taught for five dollars a day I worked as hard as any other teacher But then you see Then when our children became Well, they were in third and fifth grade Over here at Roosevelt School There was a shortage of teachers And they called and asked if I would Take a room over here at Roosevelt School Where our children were going And so I taught all year In the same building where the children went But by that time they gave you another A contract, you know So I wasn't teaching for any substitute wages And They had rescinded this rule on marrying people by that time Yeah Was it only for depression time you think? No, it was It was just an idea that they couldn't work They had that rule because I don't know what their reason was But they had that rule Well that rule was pretty prevalent In many, many places Not just in the U.S. There were states though Well It was not the national I don't know if it was a state rule It was a city A city But other areas I mean, you know It was true that any teacher that Got married Not the men Women, yeah When they got married They had to quit They had to quit They had to quit teaching Yeah So there was an idea they had And the interesting thing When I started teaching I taught under the principal That I had gone all through Erickson School to When I was a child She had known me since I was a kindergartner Oh That was quite a Quite a treat To work for her Then you continued on teaching After your children Well, at the end of that year that I taught I decided I'd rather go back to Subbing And not be away from the home all the time Although our children did have They didn't come home for lunch You had two children Yes Uh-huh And so I didn't go back to teaching But in the next three years I taught half a year every year I either taught for a teacher that was sick And out for a semester I taught for two men who became principals I took their place And so then the following year When in August they called and asked If I would take a third grade Because they had no teacher And I was over at Washington School I said, I give up I said, if I do this, I stick I won't stop at the end of the year And so then I continued And at the same time I wanted my degree Because the degree people had More money than I did Without the degree And so I went to Moline Community College I went to Black Hawk And then I enrolled at Augustana And I went to summer school and night school Until finally in 1965, January I took a leave of absence from my position And went and got my last three subjects And graduated between my two children Our children went to Bethel College in St. Paul But our son graduated in 1964 I graduated from Augustana in 1965 And our daughter graduated from Bethel in 1966 So I finally had And one of the teachers said Why are you doing this? Just look at the money you're losing I said, that doesn't make any difference I want the degree And you know, my salary went way up The next fall because I had a degree I didn't lose anything I just You bettered yourself Yeah, I bettered myself, right And by that time I had My father had remarried And Was your mother died? Yes, my mother died at 58 In 1945 And in 1950 my father married His widowed sister-in-law She was married to his brother That was another brother that had come over here To this country And they lived out in the east And then she was living in Detroit at the time That my dad married her And she was alone She had had to rear her children