 Cassette 3, the continuation with Ruth and Warren Peterson, Cassette 3, Side 1. If we go back now a little bit from the visit in Sweden and back to the farm again, like your mother now, was she preparing meals like a Swedish housewife you think or did she become American? American. American. American. American. Yes, yes, yes. I had never had a Swedish meatball ever at home. Stockfish you didn't know anything about? I introduced you to stockfish. There was many down there. Now here in Moline they had stores that had all that Swedish root, you know, we got root fish and potatoes korv, well some people make potatoes korv, you know, and all the rest of the stuff that comes from Sweden. I had never had it. there was all America. It was all America. And you see, we had to cook for thrashers. Thrashers would come and and they'd be there for four dinner and supper. And there would be maybe 25 for dinner and 25 for supper and maybe 25 the next day. And and the ladies, Mrs. Grimm that live next door, she and Mama would exchange. And it was it wasn't anything to kill four or five chickens for that and also buy beef. So those hungry thrashers would have plenty to eat, see? And and the table would be set in the kitchen long and so that about 14 people could sit there. And and then the other 14 would have to be later. And they always tried to fight to get in at the first table and mashed potatoes. You see chicken, fried chicken, mashed potatoes, roast beef, tomatoes, sliced tomatoes, because they'd be in that time of the year and then great big layer cakes that they love and probably for dessert and peach sauce. Peach sauce was just about about normal. And then we had a competition between the housewives for this threshing. Kind of. Yes. Because I was afraid to serve something less than the neighbor. Oh, yes, yes. And some people had now my my best girlfriend's mother. She had the reputation of setting the best meal. You see, that was a great honor. You see, how about your cousins now? Sandals. Oh, yes. They were also in the threshing. Oh, yes. But but they would they would not be in the same group with us, don't you see? Because they'd be near neighbors and their neighbors. But you were 25 in the threshing. Oh, about that. There would be 25. And the the mean job would be the one being up on the straw stack with all that straw floating down on you. And their job was always the mean one. Easy to get. Oh, yeah. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Nobody asked for that. Well, you know, they had to have guys shoveling the shocks on the wagon and they had to have guys driving in and some shoveling it off. Uh-huh. And threshing. And then somebody up there making the care of the straw. Straw. And actually what you were supposed to do was that that the owner should be up there on the straw stack, you know, and and then have one other fellow help him. But it didn't always work out that way. And what you mean on the on the biggles, you know, because it goes up, you know, and gets down your neck and hot and tired. You know, you ever see one of the other years? Was this the only to be up to? It was not the honor. It was it was the owner of the farm. You see where they were. What should really go up there and do it, you know, and with the dirtiest job. Yes. Very easy. Because you didn't want to push on somebody else. No, no. And then maybe a hired man. You see, if he had a hired man would do it. So did I use a fan to blow up there? Yes, yes, yes, yes. Could be the whole thing. And how about the grain up? Was this sacked or did it come loose in the middle? Loose, loose, loose, loose. So they had to shovel into the bins. Oh, I see. Oh, yeah. It was it was work. You have to have a wagon there to catch the grain. Yes. And they bought to the where they want to keep it. To the oat bin. Oat bin, the wheat bin. Wheat bin or wherever they. And how many days could they go on there? Oh, about two usually. Two days. Like the old farm. Uh huh. Uh huh. And you pray that it wouldn't rain. See here. And how many acres? Yes. Yes. And there was a steam engine. Oh, yes. Where they had to fire it up. You could hear it. You could hear it for three miles away coming in. A big long belt. Did you see those? Yes, they were always flapping. Yeah. Oh, the kids loved it. We loved it. You know, the meals were all good, too, you know. And when Mama would go over to Grant to the grain farm to help her, then I'd go along, too. And I remember once I ate so much. Oh, I'm sorry. I didn't mean to put that on. You ate too much chocolate cake. I still remember how awful I felt afterwards. So were your mother nervous then for those threshing parties? Not really. Because she worked so hard. I don't think she was particularly nervous. Mama was efficient. She knew how to do things. And oh, she worked a long time beforehand to get things ready. And a great big long white tablecloth, too. You didn't put them down at oilcloth. You used a great big, nice white tablecloth. I don't know if it was linen or not. Some sort. It was white. It'd be a bogus linen, you know. That was kind of a big event in those farmer days, because they'd threshing and thawing. Did they use napkins, too? No. No, I don't think so. I don't think so. Maybe, though. I don't know. I think it was kind of in the days before paper napkins. Oh, I don't think they did paper napkins. No? They probably were cloth napkins. And tempers would flare. I remember that my father had a hired man that wasn't awfully bright, and his name was Charlie Stokes. And the men loved to tease him to make him angry. And my father just hated it because he wasn't bright. And one day at threshing time, they got him so irritated that he grabbed a great big fork and he was going to run him through with the fork. And Papa took him and calmed him down. And then he said to the men, you just can't do that to him. You leave him alone. He's got a breaking point there. And I can remember that because it was the excitement of of of teasing someone. And then, you know, a bunch of men, if they can just get on something like that, they they just ride it to death. And one of the of the young fellows, he had asked a girl to for a date. And she was one of the girls in Sharpsburg. And she had made all sorts of fun of him because he said, well, you'd better come and go. So they were yelling that at him all the time, you know, or people. It was the kind of entertainment. That was that was entertainment. Sure. That was a lot of fun. You know, you are also helping out with your mother in the kitchen. Yes. Yeah. Yes. We three girls were all helping you see. Good boy. You helped a time like that. No dishwasher, did you? No. I can remember late at night. Of course you get ready for the next meal. Because you get they had breakfast. No, they wouldn't have breakfast. That would break. They would have breakfast at home and then they would have the dinner and the supper. Some of them who had chores to do at home would not always stay for supper. Your supper meal was less. But there would be this greasy old man that ran the engine. You know, he'd come in and he had a big meal. I would say that maybe for the supper meal, they'd be at the most 15. You see, the others would clear out. Papa usually wouldn't stay for supper either because he had milking to do. You know, the engine man, he was an important guy. You know, he was. He came to all the meetings. Oh, he did. And then he did. They kind of look up to him because they depend on him. No. Yes. Yes. If he didn't get the right spark plug, you know, boy, you're in trouble. I think the fellow that owned the outfit usually was the engine man. Yes. Yes. So there was no cooperative deal between the farmers and the threshing office. There was just one man owning it and going along with it. Yes. Yeah. One man owned it. And then they would pay him so much for the use of his equipment. And then, of course, the people that come and help, they didn't get paid because you went and helped them. You helped them in turn. That's the way it worked. There was threshing also. Oh, for quite. Well, it would be mostly it would be in the summertime and that would be at the end of July and into August. Do you have the winter wheat on there? Yes, I think the wheat and the oats. We were shocking them all around the fourth of July. And then you threshed it about three weeks later. Yeah, about three weeks later, you could start in. And then the cows and the cattle and the pigs. Oh, yes. Already for fresh. Yes. Yeah. One of the worst things that happened in my memory. My father, in order to make money, he sold Indiana silos. And he, you know, he'd make something off of that. And one day he had gone to to see some prospects about selling silos. And there was a load of hay on the hay wagon and it started to sprinkle in rain. So my mother said she would set the hay fork and my sister, Edith, was to lead the hay horse. And we were going to get that hay up in the hay mound before it got ruined. And she set the hay fork. And my sister started to lead the horse. And my mother saw that the rope was twisted, so she grabbed the rope to untwist it and the hay fork was jerked up. And she went flying almost up to the top of the barn. And when my sister got outside, she was yelling and yelling. And she went through the part of the barn, which was called the the where the cattle stayed during the wintertime. But that was the pulley started here. And you went through this long old gangway of the barn and then you came out here. And when she came out, she saw my mama. So she had to turn the horse back and he was not too easy to turn back. And Mama came down hanging onto the rope and these fingers. You could see the bone where the rope had had had had had hang on, you know. You know, you've seen those hands. First they go up and then they go back and they release it. And oh, I remember how worried we were. And we didn't we didn't take her to the to the doctor until Papa got home. See, but she went in and and she put in the wash basin. That was always pretty clean. She put in a whiskey and then put her hands right down into that alcohol whiskey. And and then when Papa came, he took her to the to the to the doctor and he showed and these two little fingers never would bend then afterwards. You know, there was no infection. No, no. She is remarkable. It's remarkable. And isn't it remarkable? See, you know, just just more natural bugs in those days. Well, I don't know. Well, and they were probably doing for all kind of the old people. Talk about that. You know how she went clear up there and my sister, even so she still remembers, you know, I know how she prayed that she could get that old horse and Dolly turned around, you know, and and slowly then she came back down. Yeah, there's no farms. Yeah, farms are dangerous. You bet. For Christmas now, what? We never had a Christmas tree. No, Papa didn't want to cut down any evergreens. He loved those evergreens. He wasn't. So he had evergreens on the farm? Yes, yes. He made it. He had evergreens that he made a that they call it, you know, so the cold windbreak see along there. Big. Well, but they were little to start with. You know, they would have made perfect Christmas trees, but not for us. So we got an old maple branch that stood this high and we covered it up with with crepe paper, you know. So we had Christmas tree made out of an old maple branch with with with with crepe paper on it and some things. Did you get the rest of yourself or did your mother help you? Oh, I think we three girls. I was the younger one, so I didn't know much about it. I know that I remember that old tree standing there. Looked pretty awful, I think. But we had we had our our our yule loft on. That's when we got it. We didn't we didn't have Christmas at Christmas morning. It was Christmas night that we got our gifts. Did you get the Christmas presents then or the Santa Claus? Well, I never believed in him very long because he never gave me very much, you know. In fact, in fact, I tell you, I kind of gave up on God because I I prayed, oh, I'll bet for her for for a year and more. My my girlfriend, she was the one whose mother had the best meals. Her name was Fern Farnum and her father, her mother and father's children. One was married when Fern came along and the other one was about to be married. So 19 and 21. And here comes this little baby that the mother thought that that she was getting a tumor, but it turned out to be a baby. Well, that was Fern. And Fern had the longest sled, you know, in in our school. She had a pony, a beautiful pony spotted Shetland pony that her father bought her. And so for years I kept saying, oh, dear God, please let me have a Shetland pony with a saddle and a braddle. I thought it was a braddle. And I did that and I never did get a pony with a saddle and a braddle, you know. And and so I don't think he heard my prayers. You kind of give up on. And I tried to work on my dad, but he said, no, pony is just no useless thing. You know, I was only a quarter of a mile from school. I didn't need a pony. What do they have practical things? You bet you. And he finally sold his saddle that I used to get on and ride out in the buggy shed and pretend I was riding. He sold that, you know. So my father didn't have much, much sympathy for for poor little me. And at Christmas Eve, now, did you have you eat that new twist? No, no, no. But we had a nice meal. Mama would probably fix chicken, you see, baked chicken and pumpkin pie. Maybe sometimes we have a nice meal. And then she sometimes she had had a stick of strumpet, you know, and mittens, which we didn't like very well, but we got on. And then usually I've kind of forgotten some of the things that she gave us. I remember that that we like clothes if there were anything that we could wear, you know. Did your mother sew all your clothes? I know my sister is. She was really good. She got good at it early in life. So so so she didn't work out in the hayfield like I did, you know. And in fact, she didn't even have to milk very many cows because I'd say, oh, eat it. If you will just make make my dress and do that, I'll make the cows. See, we took turns, you know, one girl one day and then another girl. The next and the next. And then I'd I'd take her turn. It was kind of nice, though, when you can shift off. It was nice. It was nice. And there was milking two times a day. Oh, yes. Morning and evening. You never milked at the noon time when the cows were born? No, no, no, no, no. But in the summertime, you milk after supper when it would be cooler. And the other thing I remember about my mother, she had flies and flies were thick as fleas down there, you know. And we would drive them out to the screen door. A dish cloth, you know, and drive them out. But there'd still be a lot of them. And at night, after I had gone to bed, I would hear this funny little sound on the ceiling of the big old kitchen. And Mama would get up on on a stool, a big old strong stool. And she had a glass about this big and she would put hot water in there. And she'd read this. And you took it up there where those flies were roosting and they would drop in there and drown. See, and she'd get a whole bunch of them and and she'd take them and she would put them in what she called the slop pail. And she'd go get a whole bunch. And when we came down in the morning, there wouldn't be a fly left. She'd gotten them. And think how tired she was. They'd be nine and ten o'clock at night, you know. And that was the last thing she did up there. Move that thing around, you know. And she didn't want fly specks up there either on her on her wallpaper, you know. But I've never heard anybody else ever doing that, you know. But she's a lot of these people on the water. They were there. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Now they watch TV, you know, they don't catch any flies. No, no. But oh, I said to Warren, I still have have horrible dreams sometime. You know, all we had was a water bucket there on the table and we'd go up to the well and get the water bucket. And once in a while I have taken a dipper out and there would have been a fly down there and I would just gag. I hated flies. So and I said, I still have dreams of gagging over a fly in the water bucket. You know, well, my dad would take it and throw it out and he'd drink the water. I'd take the water and I'd throw the water out. And they say, you can't waste water that way. I think everyone. I was a kid. That's where you had to be in order to get water. You had a bucket of water with a dipper in there. The hired man drank out of all of us drank out of. Same dipper. Same. Now, goodness, you got you can't even drink out of the same glass. You know, you got to have a separate glass. Sterilized. Sterilized. Yeah. And all of you go to a motel. I even have all complete sterilized. So I tell him, you know, they're always saying, oh, the children today are so bad and it must be hard to be a school teacher. And I said, I've got a story from my childhood back in the early. Well, I started the school in 1912. So this would be about 1912 or 13 that that can just top any of them. And and so they say, what is it? And I say, well, when I was going to country school, there wasn't a well there. So they had to go about an eighth of a mile up to a farmhouse, the grim farm that we now own and pump the water and bring a pail back. And then it stood out there in the hall and all the kids drank out of this bucket. But but we but we didn't have we each had a little little collapsible cup. Some of those, you know, so so you were supposed to drink out of that to be helpful. And so these two boys went up to Grimm's and they probably were in seventh and eighth grade. And on the way back, there's a big old tall hedge before you got to our school yard. They decided it'd be fun to urinate in that water. And we'd all drink a little bit of urine in the water. And so they came and brought it back. But thank God a little kid, Burl Fender, had seen him and he told on him, you know. So I said, you know, talk about hoodlums these days. That was pretty dirty trick to you. Well, the teacher was so mad about it that she expelled him. But the parents stood up for the kids, you know, just a child. Nice childish prank. What did you know? But now that's the truth. So help me. So so try to top that. Because his name was Bringham Young. He didn't want an old. He didn't want old school teachers. No, I want a young teacher. Yeah. Yeah. Bringham Young. Yeah. That was the same. Well, I suppose the kids, they were what you call smart yesterday, too. Oh, yeah. At Halloween time, for instance, they got the farmers wheel up on the roof. Oh, yes. And what were you doing out there in Charlottesville? Oh, you were three girls. So many. No, no, we never we never got to go out, but we got to go out maybasketing. But but but but but the at the pranks, Halloween pranks, we always went to school and we knew that the privies would be knocked over. You know, the girls privy and the boys privy at Halloween. And sometimes and and then sometimes there'd be a buggy up on top of the schoolhouse. They must have tugged like everything to get the old buggy up there. But this privy business, though, why didn't they anchor them down when they know there was something to know? Sometimes they probably own it would be sitting in there, you know. Oh, did they here? Oh, they do that. Oh, dear. Well, they wouldn't push it on because he'd start. Usually start after they didn't know whether they had a gun or not. Shoot up in the air or something. But we always investigate. Yes, we never did very much. Boy, if you go near that place, you want to investigate first because there's probably a guy inside with a gun. Suits you with salt and pepper. Well, you went off for that. Yeah, we do. I mean, he was a city slicker. You think that'd be something very bad. So the witness, hey, that was one of the favorite tricks. You take a piece of candle, you know, you can't wash that off very good. You're right on the window. You can't wash it off. If you drank a soap, it wasn't hard. And it was no good. You know, then they take a school and cut notches in the school and wind it up and put it on the window and go. Right. I don't sound like you're breaking, but. It was only if you didn't receive any treat. It was when you didn't receive any treat for the. Oh, no, no, no. Made yourself scarce. Yeah, but did you ask? That's just the reason. That's just the reason. Thank you. Trick or treat. Trick or treat. So to see the candy. Well, there was nothing your time. No, no. I see. The only time we got something like that was when somebody got married and we had shivery or shivery. We'd all get a dishpan or an old bucket or something to make noise. And we we got there when they ride and they came home, you know, from the marriage ceremonies. Usually they came home and you'd sit out there and you'd bang on that tubs and pans and washboards. And but you would always wait until they'd gone to bed, the happy couple. Oh, yes. And and if they'd gone a little trip, you wait until you knew they were home. And then, yeah, they had to be home. But then they they come out and maybe give you a dollar or two dollars. And then you go up to the ice cream store and everybody get an ice cream cone or something like that. So there was no way to get rid of you. That's right. And if they didn't give us that, we would keep on going. But on Halloween, there was no trick or treat in those days. You were talking about May best. What was that? The first of May, we would get boxes like oatmeal boxes and and anything that came in boxes, and we would cover them with crepe paper and make them with a little pre-handle. And then we would put flowers and little candy in there. And then we'd go to the neighbors and we would would put them on the doorstep. And then we would go around in the back and we would have these these roller things, you know, to get tic tacs. And then they would come out and they would find the May basket. We thought that was really nice. Tic tac, they take a spool, you know, and they just cut notches in it and then they stick a pin through there. And I think we'd yell May basket, May basket too. And you find a string around there where you put that in the order and you give them a pull and they go. We thought that was very serious. That was fun. It was your own invention. You made this yourself? A lot of kids had them. They had nothing to make them. All you needed was an empty spool. They didn't send those things to the store? Oh, no. Didn't it have notches into the... That's what I say. You had to cut notches. On the edge of a spool, there's those two ridges to keep... You cut notches in there. That's right, you had to cut notches. And then you'd take a nail and push it through the center of the spool and put it into a little stick or something. And you'd put... wind it up with thread around there. And you'd pull it, pull it, lay that on the wind and pull it and go... Make a noise, you know. A big noise. But you had more trouble than Warren, though. Here he had hoses all over you. Yeah, and people, you see... He didn't have to grow up saying, Oh, you're just a dumb Swede, you know. See, that's how I had it. And then they would, instead of calling me Ruth, they'd say, Roodalaw, Roodalaw, there goes Roodalaw. And I just grew up so that I just thought that the next two... I don't know what. Both of my sisters were in school at the same time, and they didn't pick on them as much as I did. I guess I was an only little kid anyway. So maybe they had a reason to pick on me. You didn't have the troubles I had. Every time we moved, and we knew plenty, moved about six times to Moline and we was up to Michigan, not so much there, but Minnesota. Every school I came to, we got a kid that can lick you, you got to fight him right now, you know. And Warren would say, yes, I know he can. You couldn't get away. They'd push you up there, you had to fight with them. You were a big husky though. You didn't back out. Not very often. But they sometimes had a bigger kid than me. Ha ha ha ha ha ha. Especially selected for it. But that's what they loved, you know, they loved to see. You had to prove yourself then. You had to prove yourself. So what happened if you got the licking? Did they pick on you? All the rest of the time. Not so much. As long as you're stuck in there a little bit, I guess. Ha ha ha ha ha ha. One, two, three. When I was going to Roosevelt School over here, that's when I was about in sixth grade, I guess. I found out in seventh grade he was always a big bully. And I was frightened of him, you know. And I'd never fight him because he was bigger than I was and everything. Two of my friends and I were out in a cornfield. It was muddy. It was over here not too far away. And we was walking down the cornfield and here come this fellow, Bill Sadney, all by himself. Here was three guys, one person, boy, we were going to have a lot of fun. So we start making mud and we surround him, throwing mud at him, you know. And he got classed a few times. But what we didn't know is that he had two friends not very far, big guys, and they caught him. Uh oh. And he says, now you've got to fight Bill Sadney, you know. And I had always been afraid of him. We got to fighting and, you know, I licked the tar out of that guy. From then on he was my good friend. Ha ha ha ha ha ha. You had to prove yourself. I didn't know I could do it, you know. Those guys, the big guys, you know, they were twice as big as we were. We were just sixth, seventh graders, you know. Boomerang. They didn't have any sport in school like they have today, no wrestling and uh... In high school they had... They had football and basketball. In grade school they had nothing. You had a ball team, you weren't playing recess or noon or something, but it was just a pick-up thing, you know. No organized activities at all. But when you went to high school, they had football and basketball and track. That's all. They were practicing that for football, for instance, though. Oh yeah. Lift weights and everything. Oh no, they didn't lift any weights. Not in those days. No, they didn't have that. They do now, though. They just went out in the football field, they gave you a uniform and they'd have you do all your exercise out there, you know. Running and tackling and pushing those sleds with the... They still had the sleds at time two. Oh yeah. They practiced every day. We had to walk about a mile from high school to the field. Then you'd practice for about two hours, you know. Start in with maybe running back and forth across the field. Then depending on what position you played with, you threw passes, count passes, and then the linemen, they had to push these. You see these sleds where the linemen run up there and push it about ten feet, and then they'd back off again. The coach, the line coach, he'd be sitting there and he'd say, let's go again, and he'd say, charge! And then he'd charge those things up there and build up your legs, you know. They practiced plays, the plays they were going to have, and quite a lot of exercise. I mean, you were worn out by the end of two hours. Then every once in a while they'd have what they call a live scrimmage where they'd meet up two teams and get one team to ball, and one coach would be behind the defensive team and one the offensive team, and they were both telling each other, their players, what to do, you know, and getting a little bumped up then too. You didn't have the protection like they had today, like the helmets and all. No, no, not as good, but it was pretty good, yeah. Usually you got banged up like this, you know. I played for two years. What did your parents say, you know, if you come home banged up? They didn't think very much of that. No, I suppose they didn't because they had the power to... Well, you're playing that rough old game, my mother would say. Why don't you quit that? No, I said, I've got to play that one. Now Warren played in college, and our son-in-law played in high school and college, but he said if he had a boy... Chess set three? No basketball. Chess set three, side two. So you didn't try out for soccer though. There was a Swedish game, you know, but you didn't have that at all. They didn't have that. In fact, it's only recently that they've had it in the schools around here. Our neighbor down there, he's from Guatemala, but he... Not Guatemala. Nicaragua. Now that's a much better game, isn't it? I mean, you don't get so hurt. He's rough too. He's rough too, but... He broke his ankle or hurt his ankle, the boy down there. He just got it out in the cast. How about in Iowa now? Did you see any football or soccer or wrestling? We had a baseball team, and we had a... Baseball. Yeah, and we had a basketball team, and we were going to have a girls' basketball team, but I guess nobody would coach us, but my sisters, they were older than I, and they had a basketball team. Little Old Sharpsburg was really good. My cousin Agnes, that I told you about, from Washington, D.C., and my sister Adina, they played, and people would come to watch them, and I felt so sad that I didn't get to play basketball, but nobody wanted to... No teacher would coach us. Didn't have many kids in school, did they? No, not too many, but enough you could have a basketball team. But I think that the thing that I really loved was that my father said, well, they think they should have an athletic program. If they'll just come out to my farm, I'll give them all the athletics they need for an athletic program. But then when he started going to the basketball games, he just loved them. He loved to go to basketball games because they're wild, and I taught at Bedford, Iowa, the county seat for six years, and he would come down there and watch the basketball games with me, and we'd go to the county tournaments, and so he really liked it. He thought it was a good sport. How about your mother? Was she... No, she wouldn't go. No, she was very pious and reverent and very, very much... She would have made a good Lutheran minister because she never gave an inch. I was going to tell you about the time that, as I said, she read her Bible every night, and she decided that my sisters who were... They went away to Bedford for their last year of high school because Sharpsburg did not have the last year, so they would go down on Monday. Papa would take them down in the car, little old Model T Ford, and he would go and get them on Friday. Well, when they graduated from 11th grade at Sharpsburg, they had a real pretty outfit that... A blouse and a skirt, and they called the skirt a green rhodolondra skirt that my sister had made with a real pretty blouse, and Bedford was going to have a party, and my sisters wanted to take those green rhodolondra skirts and the blouse down in their suitcases to Bedford, Iowa, and Mama said no, that what they had was plenty good enough. There they were just hanging up in the closet, you know, doing no anything. And my sisters cried, and I shed bogus tears too because I thought I would get in good with my sisters for crying for those green rhodolondra skirts. And we begged and we pleaded and we pleaded and we begged, and she would not give an inch, you know. Now, why wouldn't she? Why wouldn't she? But they had to wear their old clothes, whatever it was they had, and those green rhodolondra skirts and the blouses hung up in the closet, and she checked to see they were there and not in the suitcase. What was the kind of idea that she got to work on? Any reason for it? None, except I think she just, I don't know. I don't know. A lot of these religious fanatics, they don't have any religion. She was keeping them pure and simple, I guess. Did she suffer not being able to go to a Lutheran church, you think? I don't know. I think that they were enough that they really believed that if you worshiped God, you know, one or two in a closet together, that's, you know. She read her Bible and she thought that was all right, I think. But she attended a Methodist church, though? Oh, once in a while, but not very often. Not often. No. So there was a different kind of teaching, she was saying, too. Yes, yes. The one time that she ever was a little bit interested in was, there was a traveling Adventist church there, you know. They always worked more on Sundays than anybody ever did, because they worship on Saturday. And they got my father and mother to go, and my papa went once, and he said, oh, I'm not going back again. But Mama went a number of times, and he was telling us, you know, that after World War I, it was all in revelations that the day was coming pretty soon now. Oh, yeah. Yeah, maybe tomorrow. And Mama kind of liked that, because in fact, she had the preacher and his wife over for supper. And I remember that Papa said he went to town, and the guy in the gas station said, oh, I understand you're joining the Adventist church. And my papa said, oh, no, we're not. So the worst friend's best. Forty-nine. Yeah, yeah. You want to spread some news, you just get the receiver. And listen. Everybody came to run a news. All you have to say is, so and so and so. How many were on the fortnight, 20? There had to be at least 20 on Mama's line, and then 20 over on the other. You had to go through Central to get to Mina, see? So you had to call Central and say, John Sandoz. So there'd be 40. So you see, people were fighting for a chance to get on the line, you know. No wonder that old lady was saying, oh, dry up, dry up. And I said that when I go down to the cemetery, I guess he was sleeping right next to Mama in Papa's grave, this old Mrs. Pennebaker. And I said, I wonder if Mama, when she's talking to St. Peter, if Mrs. Pennebaker said, oh, dry up. So she knew what that meant. Oh, yeah, Mama knew. But she... Mrs. Pennebaker couldn't understand Swedish. No, no, but Mama could understand English. So she caught on. Yeah. So did they come together for coffee, Mrs. Pennebaker and your mother? Never, never. Never? No, never, never. There was a distinct... Well, I suppose if Mama had joined the ladies' aid, it would have been all right, but she never joined things like that. But she was also Methodist then. Oh, yeah, she was. Most of the people around there were Methodists. Yeah. My sister's husband was Presbyterian. There was a Presbyterian church. And in the later years, Papa liked the Presbyterian church. He said they were a little more dignified, and he went with my sister, too, you know. Well, he became a big farm owner at that time. Oh, sure. Oh, yes, yes. So it was a good place, you know. Yes, yes. In fact, the people next door to us, the fenders who would, you know, thought they were a lot better than we were, they borrowed $3,000 from my dad and never paid it back, you know, never. And from the Swanson brothers I told you about, they were pretty well off the back. They borrowed from them, too, and then they took bankruptcy, the fenders. And so my father and the Swanson brothers and there were some booths, they hauled them into the court up at Creston to see why they could take bankruptcy. But they were clever. Their son got it all straightened around, so they got this bankruptcy. But he had to go into court and answer to these people because he still kept his three farms, you know. The fender kept his three farms. How could he still live with the community? Well, he wasn't very well liked, you know, I can tell you after that. And the son who did it, he moved away to Des Moines because there was an awful uproar about him cheating them out. And then Papa, $3,000, I think Swanson's $5,000, Booth brothers $3,000. And the old man had gone on the son's note, see. And then, to make matters worse, he put everything in his wife's name, see. And the judge said, or the lawyer said, How come that your wife has three farms and you don't have anything? And he said, Oh, she had better luck raising colts than I had, you know. Gee. But anyway, Dad said they made him sweat a little bit, you know. And the son moved away. And then every year they'd buy a new car. Nobody else was buying a new car in the Depression, you know. So they were crooks, weren't they? So this week they never, they weren't up to customs that kind of business? No, no, no, no. Then quite some time later, one of his son-in-laws, Mr. Fender's son-in-law, was going to marry Zenith Fender. And he had planned to rent a farm, and he came up and asked to borrow money from my dad. Well, Dad knew that he was marrying this Fender girl, and he told him no. And he said, Damn it, you've just shot all my plans to hell. And Dad said, You get out of here. You don't go cursing around here, you know. But imagine the nerve, see. But Dad had the money, and he didn't tell him that he was going to marry this Fender girl. But you don't keep secrets like that. And Dad said, Well, of course he wasn't going to loan him any money, a young pup like that. So that was the usual thing to do, and you went to the neighbor and signed a warrant or something like that. And they didn't refuse? Papa didn't, because at the time that I, with Fender, borrowed that $3,000 from Dad, it was pretty good times then, see. And I suppose he got good interest on it for a little while, and then after a while he didn't pay it. And then he and his dad took bankruptcy and bad debt. And that was during the Depression years, of course. Except Fender's kept their three farms. No, no, no, you had to put a collateral on things. You couldn't get away with just signing a note, none of us. I don't know, I don't know. Well, nobody does it with anyone because you're risking this waste here. Yeah, yeah. So that's when Dad started buying U.S. savings bonds. He says, I don't have to beg for my money back again. So during the Depression, was there hard times on the farm? Oh, yes, yes, yes. You were still home then? Yeah, I was still home. I was teaching, and the bank that I had my money in, it closed. I think I got $10 out of it. I didn't have very much around $500. Was it in Bedford or in... I was teaching at Bedford, but it closed in Sharpsburg. The Sharpsburg Bank closed. And there were a lot of bank closures then. And there were farmers that had to walk away from the farm. Yes, yes. And the insurance companies were taking the farms, selling them. And people who had farms there for 50, 60 years, you know, lost their farms. Well, it was corn was selling for $0.10 a bushel, and hogs were selling for $0.03 a pound. What do you do? I saw my sister grow old at those. She married in 1926, and I don't think that she or her husband had any new clothes until about 1940 when things got a little bit better with the war, you know, and so on. They didn't. Well, they started out farming then. They started out farming. She had saved from her school teaching money, she'd saved around $5,000 because she taught quite a while and he had money. They put that down, but they bought a farm for $200 an acre, and in a year's time it wasn't worth $100 an acre. So it was. It was hard times. And now in 1986, the farmers are also in trouble. They are. My heart bleeds for them. I was looking at numbers. Now we're talking about millions and $2,000 an acre, I suppose. Farmland has gone, they reached a peak here a couple years ago, and then it's been gradually going down, and its value is About 50% of what it was 10 years ago. It's not even 50% anymore of what it was like two or three years ago. They were getting $2,000 and sometimes $3,000 an acre. You know, we tried to sell our farms, and we was going to ask for a while. They said, oh, you could get over $1,000 an acre, about $1,500, but no, I don't think you can get $500 an acre. So we're going to hang on. So you lent out then to a sharecropper? A sharecropper. That way the guy in the rent can't lose much. No, no. And whatever little we get is just like finding a chinook, golly, you know, heritage from my mother and my father, you know. And we have a farm manager, and he lived on our farm as a renter for about 20 years, and then he retired, and we'd had a farm manager before that, and he also retired. And then this Howard Purdue said, I would just love to manage your farm. So he lives at Bedford, Iowa, and then he manages our farm, makes all the decisions. All we get is a yearly report. We don't make any decisions. A yearly report and a check, you know. What could be sweeter than that? Is it 160 acres then? 158. It's not a quarter section, but it's 156 actual acres. 156, I call it 160-acre farm. It was a small farm. My sister Dina got one for about 300 acres, and my sister Edith got the home farm, about 300 acres. But we were very content with ours. You managed it sweet, so that's why Edith wants to be a farmer. It's his fault. It's always his fault. No, no. Hers too, it's easy. No, no. I don't want to be a farmer anymore. I like the city life. My sister on the farm, they have a real nice life. I had a pretty good job. Oh, he had a good job with the Arizona State. I'm going to stay and be a farmer, a gentleman farmer. I'm going to have a rice source down there, a writer on, and Tennessee Walker. Some nice buildings down there, but there's nobody living in them. Because, well, they don't farm 160-acre farm. They want about three like that or four, so they can only live in one set of buildings. The rest of them sit empty. And as houses step way out in the country, and the city folks don't want to go way out there, better place, so they sit empty. I think it will eventually be that some big outfit will buy up the whole thing, and farm maybe 10,000 acres, all of this. But don't you think they will go back to small farming again? I don't think so. You don't think so? I think the day of it is over. I think the day is over. You can't see that modern way of farming is machinery. Big machines. I don't think you can own all that machinery and live on 150, 160 acres. You could kind of come out by hiring your plowing done and your combining and you can hire this and that and raise some. You should have to raise some livestock, but you couldn't make it on crop farming. No, you couldn't do that. There's got to be some potential for hogs. This man that is our farm manager now, they lived on this, and they made their living that way. He was a renter all his life, but I don't think he wanted to do anything more than that. I was saying that they lived in the house, and she loved it. It was the Grimm farm, and she took the linoleum up, and there was cherry wood underneath there, and she had antiques, and it was a lovely house because it just fit antiques so well. But then after they left, we only had one or two living there after that, and then it stayed empty because he did rent it out one time, and he came up there, this farm manager, and told those people to get out because they were abusing it. I think the reason that he was able to make a living on 160 acres was that he raised quite a few hogs, and they had no children. Their one little boy, who was 12, they found him. He had hung himself out in the barn. So I think it just took the heart out of them, and they never discussed it with me, but they had one bedroom where all his pictures were, and he may have seen a movie or some darn thing. How do you know? But I have said I think the day of a small farmer's gone, I think that it will be, as Warren says, somebody owning 10,000 acres. They had these big machines. Big machines. Costed several hundred thousand dollars, you know. Can't afford that. And as you drive across Iowa, you'll see farmhouse after farmhouse standing empty, and it just makes you look, makes it sad. You go all the way from the main path to see all those. I don't think it's half of what we're talking about. If we compare your life now with your husband's, Warren here, he had to contend with the Belgian people. And you had the KKK, and you had foreigners, Yankees, and all kinds of stuff. Yes, yes. Local yokels. Like they say, you know, the elephant never forgets. How about forgiving? Well, I suppose, you know, after the years pass, you kind of think, well, maybe you brought it on a little yourself. Did you answer back what they had told you? Not very much. Mama didn't think that was very ladylike. But my way of answering back was getting all the head marks, you know. In spelling, you lined up all the kids, you know. And at the end of the year, whoever got the head mark, you see, if the guy up here could spell the word, that was all right, and then he had another word. But if they didn't, then you could go up here, you know. So my way of getting back was getting all the head marks and getting the book, the prize at the end of it. And they'd say, well, look at it. Spelling bee. Yeah, kind of a spelling bee. But they, you felt pretty good, though. Oh, I felt good about myself, I think. Didn't they have respect for you? Oh, no, they just hated me all the more, I think, you know. Those are dumb sweets, the A's. Yeah, and then we had to take a rural eighth-grade examination that was sent out from Des Moines. And it was, oh, about, I think, spelling, geography, history, arithmetic, grammar, civics, penmanship, music. There were about ten different subjects that were sent out, and you went and you wrote for two days. And along with praying for a pony, I started in about in sixth grade because I knew I was going to have to pass this eighth-grade examination. So I'd say, oh, dear God, let me pass the eighth-grade rural examination, you know, every now and then. And I passed it, and I was the only one who passed it in that school. And there was Zenith Fender and Myrtle Fender and Eddie Ritchie and Fern Farnum and somebody else, you know. And they didn't pass it, but I did. And they said the only reason I passed it was because I had two older sisters that helped me, see. But, you know, that was my way, I suppose, of getting back. I just bought by, and then Mama wanting me to be best, too. She was tall. Oh, yes, and she drilled me on my spelling words, you know. And I remember I got kind of tired of that, so she'd say, we'll have your – where's your spelling book? We'll go over the spelling words. And I'd say, oh, I forgot it, Mom, you know, in the schoolhouse. And that went on just about three times, and I forgot it, Mama. And so she made me get up in the dark the next morning and go down to that schoolhouse. And, you see, in those country schools, we're left unlocked, and tramps slept in there lots of times during their – because they were warm, you know. And she made me go down there and get my spelling book. And I can still remember trudging down there that quarter mile over the hill and down the hall and up the hill and into the schoolhouse and grab my spelling book. I never forgot it again, you know. Mama told me years afterwards that she went and watched too because she was kind of worried about me too. But she didn't let me know that she was watching there in the dark. But I learned my spelling, you know. So they had quite a bit of what parents look after what the kids are doing in school. Oh, yes, yes. She was a good PTA representative. Did she go to school? No, they didn't have PTA. No, they didn't have – but we would go on programs. And she kept track of how well we were learning, you know. I don't think they had PTAs or anything. No, I don't either. Was she able to pronounce the words right, the way you spelled them? Well, good enough so I would know what it was. Oh, yes, yes. She was pretty good. How about, were you elected the homecoming queen? Lord, no. At Shoresbury? Oh, Lord, no. No. Did they have a homecoming queen? They had one that was the May Queen. I just hated her guts. In fact, I think she was a sophomore and none of the senior girls got to be homecoming queen, you know. Oh, dear. We had to dance in ugly old costumes that they made that were supposed to be raindrops or something. So you had a tough competition? I had a tough competition. How about in Iowa? I had one good friend, and she was the one with the pony. And she and I, we were just thick as sleeves. And we kept that up all our lives until on her 60th birthday. She married and lived in Denver. I called her birthday and wished her a happy birthday, and she said she'd had a heart attack, but the doctor said that she could get up real soon. And the next day her husband called and told me she had died on her 60th birthday. And I still dream about her because we, from the time I was five, I met her at school, and we went all through grade school together and all through high school together, and she taught rural school for a while. She stood up with Juan and me when we were married. So that was what I had, and you see, that was very good to have one good friend. And when they said anything to her, she just hauled off and slapped them, you know. And she was big. She was a big girl. I remember that the fender boy said something to her, and she just gave him a good whack across the face. And I said, gee, I wish I dared do that. You didn't have a boyfriend in school that could protect you. No, no, they didn't. You didn't care for it. Well, I cared for it, but they didn't care much for me, I don't think, although I suppose that I had chances to date, but my papa said I'd get a gold watch if I didn't date any, you know. I think I wanted to. So you didn't remember again, a boyfriend. So they were strict. With reason, and kind of glad they were, because now this, my sisters were about 13 and 14 when one of the fender girls got pregnant and had to get married, and her baby was born in three months. But she said, well, I'm glad I got married, and I'm not old maid like those Christensen girls, and they were 13 and 14 years old, but they were old maids, you know. But Mama would say in kind of a nice way, you know, and I said the same to my girls, you know, the little dandelions in the world, they pop up in the spring and they look at the rose and they say, oh my goodness, you haven't bloomed yet, you know, and it takes a little longer to mature. I suppose it's not easy to raise three girls. No, and then my sister Edina was very pretty. She just had boys were hanging around her all the time, for the time she was in first grade, you know. When I went to school, and especially in the elementary school, boys, they didn't care for any dates. They thought they were sissies if you put them around the girls. That didn't start until they got into high school, maybe a thousand dollars. But up until that time, why? Geez, that's sissy. That's what they called you if you put them around the girls. But you weren't sure any affections were anybody else. You went out in the woods and went swimming and all that kind of thing, but you didn't go running around with any girls. But the girls were thinking about it, because I know the handsomest boy in school, he gave Fern a Valentine, but he didn't give me one. I don't know of any. Well, time changes. You know, my dentist deadened me up, and he said that I have to go and get some penicillin tonight. He gave me a prescription, and he said that it will probably be very painful. But you're just great. I haven't had one feeling of pain while you were here. I've been to Novocaine. You've been to Novocaine. No, but thank you very much, because it's such fun talking with you. Oh, thank you very much. I haven't felt bad. He said to take some aspirin, and you're the aspirin. I haven't taken any aspirin. Warren, will you give him Francis Peter?