 They're not over here. In the winter quarters where the Mormons stayed there and settled up and died at Florence. Well, then, see, my grandfather's brother died there. And then they went on to Salt Lake City. They weren't Mormons. They were Lutherans. Because there's a lot of them with the Mormons that weren't Mormons. And they didn't like that, so then they liked Omaha. So they came back to Omaha and settled. And what year was that, about 1850s, you think, or 60s? Somewhere around there, whenever Brigham Young went through. I don't remember exactly when the Mormon failed. And this was your great-grandfather? That was my great-grandfather. Paul Christoph Alchrist. Yeah, and my grandfather. One of the boys. There was four boys. As you can probably see from there. Carl Oscar, Gustav Wilhelm, Joseph, Ernst, and Johan. One of them was your father. No, one of them was my grandfather, Joe. Well, he was your grandfather. You got to go back, you know. Yeah. And Jenny, seven. You got seven kids on your grandfather's side. Yeah. In that family. And the whole family came here to the United States. Yeah, I understand that. Yeah, we had 27th of October, 1987. And I'm sitting together with Walter Alchrist in Pounce of Bluffs, Iowa. And we were born in 1919, 26th of September in Florence, Omaha, Nebraska. That's a suburb of Omaha. So, you have a very interesting beginning here. Your great-grandfather, he came from Sweden. Yeah, so did my grandfather and my grandmother. Both came from Sweden. Do you remember your grandparents? Oh, very well. What did they tell you about this? Because they were probably handed on stories about what happened. Oh, I don't know. Like I told you, they basically told me about coming over to this country and going with the Mormons to Florence, Nebraska, winter quartered there. And then they went on to Salt Lake City and then came back to Omaha to settle. So your great-grandfather, he came from Orby in Kalmar, L.A. It says on this paper here. Yeah, that's right. Orby, Kalmar, L.A., in Sweden. And his birth date was 1822 when he died in 1898 in Omaha. Is he buried in this area, in the cemetery here that you know of? No, he's not buried here for some reason. He died in Omaha, it says on the paper. Did he die in Omaha? Yes. As far as the... There's no tombstone. There's no grave up. See, most of them are out on the forest lawn. My grandparents are there, and several of the Alkwis that are mentioned in here are buried out there in one locale on the forest lawn. But there is no stone or marker that... But as far as he being buried there, I've never seen a marker of that grave or any knowledge of where he was interned at all. So, like your grandparents, were they speaking Swedish at the time when you... Well, they spoke Swedish quite often, particularly when my grandmother got mad at my grandfather. She didn't want to let me know what she was saying. But he was one of the easiest-going fellows I ever saw in my life. In fact, my dad even mentioned the fact he only got mad once in his life. And that was when his brother Frank brought home some of these old Western-type magazines, you know. And they always had good books for the kids to read. And he took these magazines and threw them in the furnace and said, You don't need to read that junk. You're going to read good books. So he says that's the only time in his life he ever saw him show any temper at all. What kind of contents were in their magazine? Was it something that he... Well, you know, those old Western ones where they go out and shoot each other up and stuff like that. Well, he says that's just junk reading, you know, where he had these good books of stories, you know, for them to read. So he read a lot of books? Oh, yeah. He used to read all the time. Swedish books or...? Well, yeah, he had some Swedish books. Most of them were American books. They spoke practically English all the time when they were here. And they never taught us grandchildren any Swedish. My dad knew quite a little Swedish, but he never spoke it to us at all. Were you able to pick up some Swedish, too? No, I never really... because I was fairly young. And, of course, well, I think I was in high school when my grandparents passed away. But my grandfather had two brothers that I remember celebrating their 80th birthday. They were twins. 80th birthday together. And I think they lived to be about 82. And my grandfather lived up to his 80s, but my dad died about 72. It was ironic that the older people that came over here from the old country lived in their 80s, and the next generation all passed away in their 70s. That is interesting. Yeah, it was always so funny. I have no idea why that happened, but then it just seemed like the older people were more durable or what. So they were some tough ones. I suppose the survivors were tough. Oh, yeah. And my grandfather was really slender. He was a tall beanpole. And, of course, in those days, unless you were a husky, they always thought you were not physically as able as the rest of them. And he proved that he was. In fact, he outlived all his brothers. Do you remember seeing any stocky persons, I mean, real fat ones at that time? Were they all slender, in your opinion? Well, they were all medium build like I am. And my grandmother was a little stockier than most of them, and she was short and stocky. And my grandfather was a little over six foot tall, which is tall for those days, you know. His brothers were not as tall as he was. He was just tall and slender. But he was known as a relaxed and very... Oh, very easygoing. My grandmother was the other way around. She was a feisty, like a Benny rooster, you know. She was really... I remember many times that she would really get on, even start jumping on him. And he wouldn't say a word. He would just go around and do all this stuff. So she was the boss then at all? Oh, yeah. And he had his basement all fixed up in a rocking chair down there and lights. And he would sit down there in the basement. And she wouldn't let him smoke his pipe in the house, so he was down there in the basement smoking his corn cob pipes and stuff like that. And he was kind of a favorite because he'd sit and read to me, you know, and stuff like that. And I was just a little kid. Did they live with you or did they have their own home? Oh, no. They had their own home. Here in Omaha? Yeah, in Omaha, out on 28th and Meredith there, right on the corner. There was a Swedish area there. Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. All along there on Meredith Street, I had one uncle live there, a great uncle. And then on up in the... I think it was up around 31st, 32nd and Meredith's where there was a whole bunch more of relatives that lived up in that area. So you heard a lot of Swedish spoken around there? Yeah, at times. But most of the time, they spoke English. As long as the old timers were still living. They never communicated much in Swedish. They stuck to the English language. I mean, I guess they accepted this country and accepted the language and never did dwell much on the old country. Your grandfather, now, he was born in Sweden. Oh, yes. In Linköping. Right. And your grandma was from Värmland. They were born in Sweden. But the great-grandfather, he came from Kalmarledin in Sweden. Yeah. How about the great-grandma? She came from St. Lars in Sweden. Right. And she also died eight years earlier in Omaha, Nebraska, 1890. What kind of work were they doing? In other words, they came with the Mormon group. Yeah. But did they never belong to the Mormons? No. So they skipped... So they went to Salt Lake with them, like I say, and they didn't like it in Salt Lake. Did they go again then, though, Mr. Frazier? Oh, you bet. Yeah. Like I say, my great-uncle then... Excuse me. My great-uncle died over there in the winter quarters where the Mormons stayed in Florence. Yes. And it's ironic, too, that my dad's brother, Frank, owned a lot of property up in that area. And I don't know whether you're familiar with Omaha, but there's Notre Dame Academy out there in North... Well, he owned that property, and he sold that to Notre Dame Academy. Plus, he owned... This up on Yonge Street. Yeah. And then also, the Mormons bought a bunch more property from him to enlarge their cemetery out there where they had the winter quarters, you know. They bought quite a lot of property from him. How was he able to secure their land? Oh, he did investments. My dad had property out in Florence there, too, in those days. In fact, my grandparents, they had, oh, I'd say in their neighborhood there, they had at least six or eight houses that they owned, nice homes there. They rented out, and that was their retirement in those days, you know. My grandfather was a tinsmith, and he worked for the Union Pacific Railroad in, I think, in Strike back in about 1920 or 21, I think they had down there. Well, he went out on strike with them, and he never went back. They got scabs to come in and replace him, and he never went back to the railroad. Did he continue his tinsmith... Oh, yeah. He had his own hardware store, and he made most of the stuff he sold. Up on the... Yeah. I don't know exactly the location of his business at that time, but I know my dad had, oh, all kinds of these tinning tools. In fact, my dad learned to trade from his dad, but he never practiced it much. He was a salesman, and then he worked at the bomber plant during the war, and he did this kind of tin work and, you know, had something to do with the tinsmith trade because he was very capable in that line of work. So he more or less followed his father's footsteps, then? No. Like I say, he was primarily a salesman. Oh, salesman, I see. Yeah. But he knew how to... Oh, yeah. He had all the tools and reamers and everything else, you know, and even when I was a kid, I used to go down and play with them. Then, see, when my mother died early in 1922, I was only three years old. My dad remarried then to a girl in Constable, Vivian Haller was her name, and that's when we moved to Constable, that's when I was about five, I think it was. And we settled up on 25th and A now, where the store is now, and we lived there until I left home, and my folks died there in the home. And so we lived there practically most of my life there when I was a youngster. So you never spent too much time then up in the Swedish area of Omaha, then, because you were too small for that? Yeah, yeah, we were kind of drawn away from it. We'd go over there, of course, to all occasions that they have, birthday parties and stuff and occasions to get together, or we'd go to them. But I wasn't that close to them. Like my grandparents, I'd go over and see them maybe, oh, I'd say probably every month or something like that. My sister used to go over and stay with my grandmother more often than I would, and grandfather, because she was older and I was one of the homeboys. So your father-in-law, was he born in Omaha or in Linköping, Sweden? My grandfather was born over in Sweden. He was with his parents then to Salt Lake. Yeah, as I understand, his parents went with him to Salt Lake. He never told you about the trip? Was he too small to remember that trip? No, he told me about going. But, you know, you pick up pieces and bits as you go along. And, of course, at that time I was too young to really care about too much of what went on, you know. As you get older, of course, you like to know more about your family history. Because your history is remarkable because you go back so long, long time. Because your grandparents were living and were able to tell you about it. They were part of it, so they go back another generation. It must have been a tremendous experience to go over land. Yeah, it was quite a hardship as I understand it. Like I say, only the survivors were the fittest. That's why they lost one of his brothers over in them there at Florence in that winter. And I guess it was a pretty severe winter they put up with. How did they come back, though? Do you know anything about that? I don't know how they came back. They never really explained it. But I imagine they had to come back the same way they went out. There wasn't any railroads or anything at that time. But I suppose there was no return ticket, though, from the border. No, no. They had to make their way back. They couldn't be able to go back. So why do you think they settled in Omaha? Was it because one of their sons died there in Florence? No, I don't think that had anything to do with it. Evidently, the whole family came back because there's no relatives in Salt Lake City. So the whole group must have came back. And then all of these brothers lived in Omaha. How were they able, though, to take care of so many kids? Seven of them. I don't know. Well, I suppose some of them died two years. There was Ewan. So he died in 1861. Ewan Edwin Alquist. Yeah, he died in Florence. Yeah, I've seen his grave up there. So there's the marker. He was not able to make it, but the rest of them, all the way up and then back again. So what kind of work was he doing, then? What did he get into, your great-grandfather? I don't know what work he was in, because I never met him. And your grandfather didn't tell you either what the... No, I don't recall that he ever said that. Did they settle in Florence then when they came back? No, I don't think so. I think they settled in Omaha proper. There couldn't have been too many Swedes, I don't think. No, of course. No churches. No. I know they went to Our Redeemer Church over there in Omaha. It's close to their location there. I can't remember. I think it's on Fowler. Is that the Lutheran Church? Yeah, Our Redeemer Lutheran Church. In fact, my dad was a... What do you call it? Star of the Church. Oh, shall I remember? You shall remember, yeah. But there was not a Swedish church, though. Oh, a lot of Swedes went there. Our Redeemer Lutheran Church. And it's located in North Omaha. Yeah. It's not real north now, but I mean, it was those days. Yeah, and... Was it in Florence yet? No. So the Swedish Lutheran Church didn't come in until the 80s. Well, I don't know much about the history of that. So your whole family belonged to that Our Redeemer Lutheran Church? Our whole family did from my grandfather on down. Now, who were the rest of... You baptized there, too, then? Yeah. Now, my uncle Frank, who was my dad's brother, married a Catholic. And he raised his only son as a Catholic. However, he never would turn Catholic. I mean, he was always a Lutheran. But I mean, he never really attended church at all then, I don't think. So that's why he was able to sell the land? Yeah, well, see, he owned an awful lot of property out there in Florence. So did my dad, and owned something up there. And then he sold out all his property eventually and moved up to Wenatchee, Washington, where his son Frank had went up to Euphrata, Washington, outside of Seattle there, you know, between Seattle and Spokane, somewhere in there. And so he sold all his property out eventually up there in Florence and moved out there. And that's where he passed away. The ironic thing about it was that he took good care of himself all the time. And he did a lot of gardening and all that. And so one night I made a remark, if anybody lived to be 100, he would. And one morning they didn't come down for breakfast, and they went to look for him. And he was dead, passed away, and he slept. Was there a heart attack then? Yeah. And how old was he then? He was 70, 74, somewhere around there. And then my dad, he always wanted to go fast because my stepmother passed away from cancer, and she had about five years of surgeries and stuff before she passed away. And he always said he wanted to go like his brother. And he was over here bowling, the bowling alley over here on Broadway. And he says, I don't feel good, and he went over and sat down, and that was it. So both of them just went like that. But I don't think there's any history of any cancer long-term in any of our family. Like I said, they all lived up to their years, but most of them died from heart attacks. But Grandpa, you were the one that had the years on his neck. Yeah, my grandfather, when he passed away, I can remember that like it was yesterday because he always ate real well. And he was getting down in years, and the doctor told him, well, he just wore out. I mean, he's getting up there in years. And so anyway, he got up that one morning and went to the bathroom, and called his wife, well, Mary, my grandmother, and said that this is it. She says, what do you mean this is it? He says, I'm going to die. And she says, you're just talking to your head. So she called us up, and we lived here in Council Bus, and she called us up. So we ran and jumped in the car and took Colin over, and he was gone by the time we got there. He just went to bed and lay down. Was Dave Hartick also then? Well, the doctor said no. His heart was strong and all that, except he just wore out. How old was he then? Eighty-four, I believe he was. So his work day was over. Yeah, he knew when his time was up. Like I said, he was always easygoing, and he knew he was going to go, and went in and laid down, and that was it. Expired right there in less than an hour afterwards anyway. And I always thought that was awful ironic. How was the diet now, like your grandpa? He liked to smoke, he said. He liked to smoke his pipe. Did he take any drinks occasionally? He may have once in a while, but he never was one that really drank heavy, neither was my dad. And no snuff, only smoking? No, no snuff, just smoking pipe. Did they exercise like they do today, for instance? Oh, no, no. Their exercises were every day. Get up early. Yeah, he was up early and always got around. Of course, he did work in the house and stuff like that. I remember years ago when we had ice boxes, he'd take an old ice box and take the whole liner out of it, put those metal liners in them and stuff like that. He just tinkered around that way in his older years. And then his reading made him relax, didn't it? Oh, yeah, he just sat and read. Of course, in those days you didn't have any television. Had some radio, but I don't recall him ever, well, he'd read the paper. Was he out walking anything on the streets? No, he never took long walks or anything like that. Of course, when he went places, he generally walked most of the time. And come to think about it, I can't remember him ever owning a car. So there was no vacations taken in? No, I don't think particularly. So they went away for a week or a few days? No, they never traveled. How about your parents now? Did they take vacations? Yeah, they'd take vacations and go places. Did your father have a car? Oh, yeah, he always had a car. And, yeah, he, well, when we moved here, well, then, of course, it wasn't like you do today. I mean, you just almost annually take a vacation, do something, go someplace. In those days, well, you generally had a reason to go. It wasn't, of course, I remember back when you didn't have the motels and stuff to stay in. And, in fact, we went up to the Kodas one time, and we stopped someplace to eat. And we all got poison, food poison, except my dad. And he traveled for years as a salesman, so he knew pretty particular what he ate. Well, he knew what to eat, and I think we had hash or something like that. And he says, no, you never ate hash in those days when you traveled, you know, because that was just the leftovers. But we had it, and we had to maintain poisoning, and so we had to stay at this house, somebody's house, we had to stop at. And, well, we were sicker than a dog that night. But it wasn't like, say, today where you go to a motel and check in, and everything was real convenient because, as I recall, there was no motels to go to, or very few hotels. And if you went through the small, this is Madison, Minnesota. It's a pretty small town, and I have several memories of that because of other incidents we had when we traveled up in that area. I had a cousin that lived up there that lived with my mother's mother here, and it was her sister's son. And he left the farm up there and came down here. And so when I was a kid, I went up there on a trip with him, and we bought the crankshaft, and he died at Madison, Minnesota. So... Those are memories you remember. Yeah, and we had to stay in this hotel. I remember for about four days why they brought one in from St. Paul, I think it was, or something. And I can always remember the fire escape with the big rope they had. There were knots in it that you threw out the window and went down the knots to get to the ground. And it was tied around the radiator, you know. So I go back a little bit in history, too. But at the same time, it was relaxing because there was something unusual in the daily routine back in... Yeah, and, oh my God, play cards. Pinochle every night, you know. My grandmother, particularly now, she took it real serious. She did? My grandfather, he was, that's game, you know. Like I say, it's easygoing. And so one time when she's... They went to... well, I mean, they always got together, and he won a booby prize this night. And, oh, it upset her something terrible. So she called him a boob, and he says, Okay, I just won't play cards anymore. And he never played cards after that. They didn't get together to play cards. And he'd go down to the basement and get his pipe. He said he wouldn't do it. Oh, well, he had his... He said his mind to it. Yeah, but he never, you know, upset and hollered or any of that stuff. I never heard my grandfather even raise his voice, but I've heard my grandmother and boy going around like this, you know, in Swedish 90% of the time. I didn't know what she was saying. So the women, they played the cards too, then? Oh, yeah, the women won. They didn't play poker? Oh, no, no, no. Pinochle, Pinochle, Pinochle. What do you call it? Recreation, the game? Yeah, but they seemed like they had them about every night. And I know whenever you went there, you had to have something to eat. And she was... oh, she was a tremendous cook. And she'd make some of the most delicious pies and cakes and stuff like that. And I know that's one reason I always like to go to Grandma's house, because I always got all that I wanted. But you also had to learn to play card early. Yeah, I had to play Pinochle. She taught you, also. Yeah, that was one of the... Went to Holden, went to Holden. That was fully the recreation, I think, in those days. And neighbors came in and played too. She had neighbors from... So your grandma, now, she never really got the time to sit at the window like your grandfather. She had to do the dishes. Oh, yeah, she was always messing with something else. So you have some good memories from your grandparents, then. Oh, very fond memories, yes. Do you remember any of your same-age group had grandparents from Sweden? That was very unusual, wasn't it? Well, like I say, I was brought over to this concert bus when I was five, and I always attended concert bus schools. So we were kind of pulled away from all that. There were not too many Swedes there that reminded you about... No, not over in this town. What church did they join over here, then? They joined the Christian church, which was where my mother was. They didn't belong to any Swedish organizations like Vast or Viking? No, no. They didn't congregate too much with the Swedish group, then? No, there was no association there with any Swedish group. Do you remember correspondence or letters and cards from Sweden back and forth? No. They never talked about the people back in Sweden? No, they never much said about it at all. They left, and that was the end of it. You might want to talk to my sister. My sister is older than I was, and she may not be able to tell you some things about it, but I personally couldn't. She spent more time with my grandparents, too, than I did. You know, like you go to your grandparents' house and you didn't have your associates to play with and stuff like that. It was kind of boring. Those days, you know, you were younger, and my sister would go over and spend two or three days at a time with them, like weekends and stuff like that. So how long far away did they live, then, your grandparents? Oh, they only lived over on 28th and Meredith. So they never moved over here, then? No, no, no, no. They stayed there all the time? Oh, yes. You went back there quite often, then? Oh, yeah, we went over quite often to visit them. And I used to go out to my uncle, my dad's brother, Frank, who lived out there in Florence, and he had a lot of property. And of course, I ran out on my cousin, Frank, which is, he was four years older than I was. In fact, he taught me how to ride a bike. He took me up on one of those hills and got on it and showed me off the hill. And boy, I learned to ride a bike down that hill. You had to. You betcha. You had to fly. Survival. So this Frank, now, your uncle, what kind of business was he in? Was he a realistic man, then, or...? He was a pretty smart fellow. He graduated from Creighton University at 19, and that was Creighton University. And then he... He's a Catholic. Yeah. And he had to go back and take two years of the law because in those days you couldn't accept a responsible job unless you were 21. In other words, you couldn't sign papers and checks and stuff like that for corporations unless you were. And then when he got out of that, I think out of school, then he worked for a while in... What was it? One of the banks in Omaha. Federal Reserve Bank, I think it was. And he became a CPA. And then he left here and he went up to Washington and set up the books for PIE, a trucking company, I think. And it was one of them. And then another one was Snow Crop. And he was controller for those companies for a while, and he'd just get tired and leave them. And then after the war, you know, when the Army broke up, the Air Force broke off in one section and the Army had another section. And during World War II, they were both part of each other. And then afterwards they split and made the Air Corps one and the Army another. And he got a job as an accountant for them, and that was his job to split the... The interview continues, next slide. Next slide. And slide two, continuation with Walter Alquist, counsel of the Iowa, slide two. So being a certified public accountant, they also rubbed off on you then, more or less. You got into... Well, I started the railroad and went in the accounting department to start with, and that was in 1942. And I stayed there just one year and went in what they call the traffic department. And I was in the passenger traffic department there until, oh, I think it was about 10 years before I retired. I think it was 72 was when they discontinued the passenger department in the railroad. And then I went to the freight department then, and I got involved in the budgeting then. When budgeting came in as a factor in the railroad, well, then I got in the incoming budget. In other words, I figured out how much money they intended to make the next year, and therefore they knew how much they could spend and make it, you know, how they make budgets up. And that's how that developed. So I got in on the ground floor on that, and that's what I did until I retired. And it was Union Pacific? Union Pacific Railroad. Did you also go through attendant college? Two years, though. That's when the war broke out, and I didn't get in the service because, well, I tried to get in the Air Force after I had two years of college in the Air Corps Department, and then I had a back injury when I was in school and playing football, and they found out about it by checking me over, and they refused me then. And so then when the draft came along, they didn't draft me because I'd already been a reject from the Air Force, so I just continued working for the railroad all during the war. And it was also important to the? Yeah, the industry, and in fact I got limited service papers, and then of course you turn them over to your employer like I did, because they'd want to know if I couldn't work in limited service in the service. But I figured out what I was doing was more important than what the military had offered me. So your grandfather and all their children went to college, but your uncle, you said, went to Creighton. No, my dad never went to college to my knowledge, and neither did my uncle. But next January. So it was your cousin, Frank, that went to Creighton? Yes, he was four years older than I. I see, so there was the third generation then actually that was able to go to school. Yeah. You also had the Depression here. You were born 1919. Yeah. So you were born when the war was over. Yeah, I was. Do you remember that? Oh, yeah, I can remember when that happened. Things were pretty hard because my dad was a salesman, you know, and he couldn't really sell nothing. So that affected immediately his work then? Oh, you betcha. Yeah, and then he, I remember him taking a job for a Ford Motor Company in the 20s and working in an assembly plant over there on Cummings Street. On Cummings. Yeah, and he worked there for, I don't know, until they closed it, I think. They closed it in the 20s. I'd have to quit making the Model A, a 32 I think it was, a 31. A 31 was the last year I think they operated over there. And then he went back as a salesman then. So he was on the deal $5 a day then? Yeah. Well. He attracted a lot of people from all over Hawaii too. Oh, you bet. Yes, I mean, anything to feed your family, you know. And that was a big factory also, wasn't it? Oh yeah, it was a pretty good size assembly plant. I can remember going over there and seeing them, bringing them out of there. And... Was it Union at that time? No. I don't think there was any unions, hardly at all. $5 a day, it didn't, Union had nothing to do with that. I know in those days $100 a month was a good salary. In fact, when I went to work for Union Pacific Railroad, I think I went on one of the higher paid jobs. I think I got $97 a month. And some of the guys, oh, started out at $80 and $74 I think was the lowest paid jobs over there in the office at the time. And gosh, you look at it today and you can't believe. Did you have to join a union then when you started with Union Pacific? No, there it was optional at that time when I started. And then, oh, we went for several years there and then I think they finally got a closed shop. And then everybody that wasn't in management had to join. And it wasn't long after I joined that I went in management, so I was no longer with the union. You were not required to belong to it then? No, I was only a short period of time. But I became active in the union. When I was there I became a committee man and stuff like that because I figured if I'm going to get in, I'll get in and find out what it's all about rather than just sit on the... So you were actually then within the union? Yes, I was a committee man. How long was going on then? Yeah, about two years there I was a committee man. It's interesting, a lot of people, you know, of course, belong to unions. Oh, yes. But very few go through meetings, though. Why is that? Well, I think it's complacency. They figure, well, somebody else will do it for me. And I know in my experience when I was a committee man, a guy said, you know what I mean, he says, why don't you do this, why don't you guys do that? And I said, why don't you come to the meeting and bring it up? I said, I'm not a legislature. I said, my job as a committee man is to sit and listen to, you know, gripes and complaints and stuff like that. People have and take it to the union. But this is the trouble with unions, is the fact that so many people will belong. Just like that building over there, they had about, I would say roughly 2,500 people that worked there. And out of 2,500, probably 2,000 of them had to belong to the union. Well, if they got up to over 50 people at a meeting, it was pretty good. And that's why a small group can come in and say, hey, let's take over the union. And they just come in and all they have to do is get 50 people, or even 35 in this case, and they can take over complete control of that union. And that's what's happened in this country. Few people say, hey, let's take over the union. The few people that actually attended the meetings, they got the blame for it, of course, what happened then, because they were... Yeah, but a lot of them didn't care. I mean, they spent the money, and just like this, what happens in all these big unions. A few people come in, take over control, and run it the way they want to, and the other people... I mean, there's no such thing as a majority rule in there, because the majority don't go. The only thing they attend maybe is a Christmas party, and something like that, you know. And then they get a big turnout, because they give away turkeys, and this and that, you know. But other than that, there's nothing. And it kind of made me sick, some of the things that went on, like, well, the railroad union, like, each city has a charter, more or less, of the union. All right, there may be 35 people in Grand Island that belong to the union, and there may be, oh, someplace up north, Platt, there may be 50 people belong, but they had each had a vote. And Omaha had maybe 2,000 belong, and only had one vote. And I says, that is wrong. So what the resulting factor is, the guy that... and then they'd have the meeting, and elect the president to represent the whole union, you know. And then all he had to do was go out and wine and dine these people, each one of these little small areas, you know, and he'd get control of the union. And then people in Omaha, that they were doing a lousy job in Omaha, they couldn't vote him out because they only had one vote. So North Platt, they could regulate the doings in Omaha? Oh, North Platt, Grand Island, all those little groups. Well, like, say you got 30 people, 35 people in Grand Island, or maybe five people, and so the guy would go out and he'd take them out to dinner. He got his vote, and then North Platt would send them out and do that, you know. So then he'd get all these other people in these small, in these other unions, you know, small groups, and they'd go, boy, he's a great guy, and all this and that. So the guys in Omaha, you know, what a lousy fellow he is, and he'd still get in because they only had one vote. So the voting went through the stomach? That's right. But how, do you think they get mad after a while, or do you let it slide? Get mad, but what are you going to do? Are you going to change it? They have a representative from each union goes there to the convention, and then what would happen? This guy's whined and dined three-fourths of them. So what are you going to do? You're not going to get a legislature through to change it. He didn't have to dine more than one here, but three in North Platt and Grand Island. Yeah, just a few, you know, to get to go out and tell them what a great guy he was, and then when they go to these conventions, the representative was the guy that he whined and dined. Actually, he didn't have to visit Omaha. Oh, that's what he did, ignored Omaha, those guys. They learn that fast. Why wouldn't they make you remad, I mean, to see you at the next convention and bring this up on the floor? You couldn't go to the convention because you only had one representative. Did you belong to AFL-CIO? Yeah, I believe it was AFL. Is that the name of this local here? No, I think the railroad unions are separate of any of that. What was it called? I don't know what it was called, the Brotherhood of Railway Steamship Clerks, I think it was. Well, it was bigger than the railroad. Well, the national union was bigger because it also included airline people and trucking people and stuff like that. What, you mean the teamsters? No, clerk people. Oh, clerk people, I see. Didn't include any of the drivers or anything like that. But at that time it could have been a strong union or it could have been a democratic organization. Yeah, but it wasn't. That's what used to get me so riled up. What kind of office did you have, secretary or treasurer? No, I was what they call a committeeman. In other words, they have, see there's several divisions of railroad traffic. I represent the traffic department. They had a counting department and then they had the transportation department and they had the law department. See, they had all these departments of the railroad and each one of them had a representative at these meetings that we went to. And so whenever they had, before they had the regular meeting, they always had a committee meeting an hour ahead. And then we'd discuss all the things, the problems they had, like the abuse of some people here and there and on and on and on, you know. And we'd watch that. I had a little problem with them because I used to travel for the railroad then over to Chicago and sometimes I couldn't make the meetings. So one guy got upset and said he didn't deserve to be paid because I wasn't at the meetings. And I says, hey, he's working for the company. He's out of the company. Then he swore him down as a company job and that I shouldn't be in the union then. But eventually I just got out of the whole thing because I did get a management job then. And then so I just banned all union activity. But how many years did you belong to the union then? Wasn't very many. I think five maybe. Did you get any benefits from it, like a little pension or? Oh no, because I was clear out of it. Then they also have what they call the, the union took over their hospital department over there in the headquarters. And they have a very good hospital department. They take care of you completely and they have regular emergency rooms over there in the building. And people whenever they get sick can go down there and they'll treat you for anything you got wrong. They don't cost you a thing. And then it used to be they give you the medicine. Well people abused that. They started out by just giving you the medicine. And then they got so that say their wife or somebody at home had a sore throat or this or that wrong, they'd go down and complain to the doctor this is what they had wrong with them. And then the next thing you know they'd give medication for that and then take it home and give it to their wife. And some of them even went so far as to give it to their neighbors, friends you know. And so they put a two dollar charge on all medication. And now as I understand it why they have to go clear the Salt Lake to get their prescriptions. If it's a renewal prescription. If it's a new prescription they'll fill it in Omaha. But if it's renewal it has to go clear the Salt Lake to get it. And but I got out of that too because the company gave us a what we call an equitable insurance. And you can go to your own doctor and this the company had their own, had doctors down there. And they do have a company doctor there that has charge of everything. In fact he can jerk anybody out of service for medical reasons he wants to. Whether union or non-union. And so that's the one you'd go to then. And if you need an emergency they got his office there too for any of the management employees. When did this take effect this medication and hospitalization program of the union? You must have been in one of the earliest ones then to bring it up. Yeah see as long as I worked there they had one. And you automatically got in it. Well at first it was, what was it I think it was about four dollars a month to belong to it. And you had to belong. And then it got up to I think by the time I retired I think they said it cost them about thirty five dollars a month to belong. And then also if you wanted to belong and you weren't an employee. In other words you weren't, you were in management you could still belong if you wanted to. But it cost about sixty dollars then. Was that paid into the union or to the hospitalization? Paid into the hospitalization. I see so the union didn't get that money? No it wasn't, it was controlled to a certain extent by the union. But it was a union specific employee's hospital fund is the way it's put out. So it has to be just purely to the hospital department of the union. I don't know how much say so they had. I don't think say so about it except you know policy matters and stuff like that possibly. And then they moved the headquarters to Salt Lake of all places. I don't know why but most of your employees are in Omaha. But of course it's more centrally located than the whole railroad. Salt Lake. So overall then they have done a lot of good then for the workers. Oh yes, yes. I think they're one of the best companies in the... But they could have been better if there had been more representation and more democratic groups. Oh, when I got in there and saw that I couldn't believe it. What could you do about it? I mean wasn't it frustrating? You said they would... No you couldn't do much about it because... There was no way to change it. We tried to change it. We tried to get it for every 100 people one representative. And of course they'd go to these meetings and then all these people come in for the national convention. And they'll represent all these small ones. They voted out, oh no, we want our one vote equal to your one vote. Did you tell them or confronted them with this? Oh sure, sure, sure. They're not going to knock it, they're the ones receiving it. Democracy is alright, it's done right, but it isn't pure democracy. It's like your house of representatives, that's the whole idea of that. Just there's so much population and you're represented. Of course your Senate's only got so many for each state. But then your house of representatives still are representative of the people. And that's all broke up into a certain amount of population representation, you know. Which is much fairer than the way we are. That's the way we wanted it done. Nobody ever accepted it. How about the political affiliation of the railroad workers? Were they Democrats mostly? Oh they tried to push it on to you. Oh sure, they tried to make it all... All Democratic. Oh you bet. But how about, did it work out that way? Or did they... People didn't... Their union was never that strong. Railroad unions were never that strong. One of the strongest is your transportation, which includes your engineers and brakemen and all those. They were stronger because they had more exacting control over the railroad. Just like this friend of mine, that's one of them, he says, they do the dumbest things, like when they put pressure on a company and were going to call a strike or something, they always do it in the summertime. He says, that's the wrong time to do it. You want to do it in the worst weather in the winter. Because management run the railroad and see whenever they would go take off. Well he says, you can imagine some guy out here throwing a switch. It's a superintendent or something, standing out there in 40 below temperatures in Wyoming, throwing switches. He says, boy he'd tell them, hurry up and settle that damn thing. But he says, summertime, don't bother him too much. It's kind of a vacation. Do you think the management were behind the leaders then to tell them to strike in the summertime? Well I always felt that the management controlled the unions. So the human being has a tendency of siding with somebody with the power. Oh you bet. In other words, a lot of guys, you get your strong guys that are really agitators and stuff like that, and by the time the company comes along, pretty soon you know the guy is on a company job. It shuts him up like nobody's business. They took care of him, but they put him on a job where he couldn't say much. And you see that quite often. The more noise you made in the union, the better chance you had of getting promoted. But after you got promoted, it doesn't mean that you got one of the better jobs. It means you just shut up. Take it or leave it. But the nurses, they're working the hard hours out there, like you said, for you below. They have a better representation than what it costs. Well, you know, the railroad like that, you work all over the country. And it's bigger than ever now because we got the Missouri Pacific. We combined with them, you know, and we bought out the Western Pacific. And it wasn't long after that that I left, but I had to work a couple of years with it. And see, I run on budget. And at first it was several hundred million dollars. And the time I left with the Missouri Pacific and Union Pacific budget was $2 billion I was working with. And before I left, they gave me a buyout. And I was 63 at the time, and they gave me this buyout. But it was premised on the idea that I had to get somebody with a master's degree in economics and also one that had some familiarity with the type of work I did. And I thought, boy, I was sunk. No way I was going to get out that way. And so finally they found the fellow in San Francisco that qualified. And he'd been with the Western Pacific and handled their budget. And so he said, yeah, he'd take it. And he came in here and worked with me for about two months. And, boy, he said he was sorry he ever opened his mouth, because he'd been working with a budget maybe out there of $200 million. When you get a $2 billion budget and compare them, there's a lot of difference involved in it. Did you have computers to deal with? Oh, you betcha. When did you start with computers after the railroads? One of the first ones in the exact year. Gosh, I couldn't tell you the exact year we started. The early 60s? Oh, yeah, one of the first ones to come out. And I remember those computer chips used to be so big, and now you can put about a thousand of them on the end of your fingernail. And that's where the difference in computers went. Well, just like on my death there, I came out with one of the first calculators. And it was about a 16-digit calculator. And I think they gave $1,700 for that calculator. And I think it was about four years later, I wanted a more modern one. And this one just had a readout. It didn't have any tape on it. So I wanted to run a tape on it. And so they gave me the one, got me a new one that was much better than the one I had. And I think they gave $495 for that. And that was just the difference in calculating in about four years. So the first, there was only about one of them made sharp, I think was the first one to come out with it that I had. And after that, my God, everybody came out with it, Texas Instruments and all of it. Now what do you pay for a calculator? Heck, you can get a calculator for a dollar now. So you have seen them all, Burrows and Frieden and Underwood and... Felton, Tarrin. She went to work for the railroad. Well, when we first got married, I figured the cheapest insurance to have is to have my wife capable of going out and getting a job when we had the family, to get a decent job. So I sent her to, before we even got married, I helped send her to Felton, Tarrin, Burrows Machine School. And she learned all the machines. She was a secretary. She could run all of Burrows' machines. She went to work for UP for a while, and they had all Felton, Tarrin calculators then. And so she went to their school, before she could go to work for UP to run her own Felton, Tarrin. Well, those are those old machines, you know, they had all those keys on them, and you used to have to go like this, you know, different keys, so many times here and move over so many times there. She got practical efficient on it, of course. And, boy, that's what we had and did all our calculating on, of course. And when the computer came in, they eliminated all that. And there's one thing you learn in a hurry. The computer is just as good as what's put in it. And always the lowest job is the one that put all the stuff in it, you know. First thing you did was learn to key punch. Well, here in key punching, you're dead. And yet the most responsive job is the lowest paid job. That's what I said, boy, that's what computers are wrong. And it's very hard to detect it. Oh, you bet. Especially if they make a mistake. Yeah, the mistake in a computer is a mistake. I mean, it's there, and there's no way it gets out of there. There had to be a human that put it in there to be wrong. And I had many programs in my forecasting and stuff like that. But, see, I worked close with what we called the Management Information Service, we called our computing department at that time. I had a programmer that worked with me all the time just on my programs. And they always did the computer work, set up their programs during the day. But at night they run all the jobs. And the night crew just ran computer information out. And then if I had a program going and something went wrong with it that didn't come out right, they called whoever was my programmer, and he'd have to go down there at 2 o'clock in the morning or whatever time it was and work on that thing until it came out right. But that's the closest association I got. When I left, they just put a terminal on my desk at that time. And Garsh and I was over there not long ago. I think everybody in the office has a terminal on their desk now. Everything is on that computer. And when I first used to use a computer, I used to put a lot of my information in. We had to go on a telephone and go up there to the suburb of Boston, Massachusetts. We had timeshare on that. I used to have to put my information in the computer through that. And, boy, you get any noise on your telephone line, boy, it would knock you out like that. So you just put in so much, like I'd have about two hours' work to put in there. And I got smart. I'd just put in so much, and then you put save. You just put save on your computer. And then anything after that was saved. It's already in the computer. It locks it in. And then you go on a little further, and then you put save in there before it goes out. Because one time I worked on there for an hour and a half, and, boy, that thing went out, and zoom, all my work was gone. I had to start over again. Boy, I had to put that save on there every so often. And this still happens even today. Yeah. You take any noise line on the telephone, it will knock your computer out. Because, see, it operated on noise. And if you get a static of any kind, boy, it would knock it out. Well, now we've got in-house computers. All the stuff they do now is right down there in their computer room. They don't have the phone transmission, but you still have noise online. So if you get a good FM station on there, they can bring a lot of air up. You betcha. How about when you came into Union Pacific, this was a hub, a very important hub on the railroad traffic. Oh, you betcha. I'm a fan of that. What happened with the railroads going down more and more with less traffic, less freight? Well, it's like... Was there a team that were pushing the rubber wheels on the highways? Well... What impact did it bring it down? The thing is, see, railroading changed so much in the period of time I worked there. It used to be all you saw was boxcars. How many boxcars you see today? It's a rarity. They're all specialized. Everything's specialized anymore. Our biggest business is what we call TOSC. That's those trailers on piggybacks or whatever you want to call them. TOSC is what we used to call them, and now it's called piggyback and so forth. And then container traffic went big. You notice we stack them even double now. Two containers, one on top of each other. Are they much more profitable, though? Well, see, the Japanese pushed it into the container traffic. See, they just take them off the boats on flat rails and away they go. And then we got into what we call... Just like a lot of Japanese... We had... What did we used to call that? Anyway, we'd take a train load from San Francisco to New York ports in Baltimore and all that. We'd take all these containers on the train, and the Japanese could bring them over to San Francisco, dump them off on this train, and we'd take them on to their New York ports, their eastern ports. And then they could take the boat back and have another load over here by the time the thing got there. And we used to work out a deal with them like that, like Toyotas. They used to bring them clear down and around through the Panama Canal and up to New Orleans. Well, we made a contract with them. You dump them at Seattle, we'll have them down in New Orleans by the time the boat gets back to Japan, and you can bring another load over. The Japanese are very, very efficient-minded. And, like, they have boats that come into Seattle, and they'll... with loads of television sets, they'll unload them. Have you ever seen them make plywood? No. I know what it's done. It's an interesting thing there is. They've got those lathe-type things, and they've got these big logs, and they're floating in water out there. And they bring them in, and they put them on these kind of lathe-type things, the turns, and then they've got these blades that just shear it off the thickness you want it. And they'll just have it stretched over a block long, this paper, or this coming out. And then they've got a thing that chops it into the shapes they want it. So your plywood grain, you know, changes each way on each thickness. One grain runs this way on one and crossways on the other, and this way on one and crossways on the other, and that's where it gets its strength. But they take this, and they've got a factory just like that on this boat. So when they bring these television sets in, they load all these logs on there. And then they start shearing those off and cutting plywood. On the boat? Yes. And then they spray between each layer of this wood, they spray the glue. And then they'll get a stack of it, hide this room, and then they put it under these big presses, and it just comes down and squeezes the glue out of them like mad, real tight. And then they're shoved into a dry kiln after they're squeezed together, and they dry them out. And by the time they hit Japan, they unload lumber. What do you call efficiency? That boat works both ways. Isn't that something? No. There's no wonder the American economy is in a squeeze. That's right. Well, see, in our boats, we take stuff. They bring stuff in here, and what do they take out? They might take back raw materials like coal and iron ore and stuff like that, and go back, and then they manufacture it over there. I'll tell you, if we ever have a war, we're dead duck because Japan controls it. Just like the money market guy said the other day. They control, I think, 60 percent of all the cash flow in this country today. But don't you think that, like the passenger traffic, of course, the...