 They say they can't find any bad papers on me. And... And it was the Missouri Valley? At Missouri Valley, yeah. I was only nine months old when we moved down to Council Bluffs here. So... And that church was Swedish? Yeah. But I don't, like I said, I don't remember too much about it as far as, but I know when we was little kids, we used to have, every Thursday night, there was about 10, 12 families got together at church in a house, at different houses, rotated it, and then had a little coffee afterwards. I can always remember that part. Your parents know John, they came from Sweden, both of them. Yeah. Did they know each other? No. They lived just a short ways away from one another, but they met in Berwyn, Illinois. Berwyn? Yeah, and then they, then they went to Missouri Valley, and I don't know, somewhere, no, they did get married in Berwyn, that was right. Then they moved to Missouri Valley. Why did they come to Missouri Valley? Some friends, relation? Well, I don't know. I never did ask him why, but. What kind of work was he doing then, your dad? Elevator work. When he came to? When he started off in Missouri Valley, was the? Yeah, yeah, he worked for Updike. Oh, I see. Elevator company, and then they closed that and opened this great big one down here. In Castle Bluffs? Yeah. One of the biggest ones. So Missouri Valley, now, how far is that from Castle Bluffs, about eight miles? No, 22 miles. Oh, 22 miles? Yeah. Up north? Yeah, just take this road right going up this way, and it's 22 miles, right up 29 interstate. And there were a lot of Swedes living at that time? At that time, yeah. There was a little colony there. Yeah. What kind of work were they doing? Were they farmers, or? Mostly were farmers, yeah. At that time, it was just a little country town, and it still is. Probably about 3,000, 4,000 people. They had the post office and schools. Yeah. You don't remember anything. You said you remember they were meeting in homes. Yeah, or church. That's a church, yeah. Was that Lutheran or Baptists, or? It was Lutheran. Oh, yeah, Lutheran all the way. Yeah, they were all Swedes. You don't remember being up there when there was a church there? No, no, because like I say, I left there when I was nine months old, and we never, well, them days, we didn't have a car until us kids got old enough, and I was the first one to have a car. My brother was a year and a half older than I was, but I was the first one to have a car, and I was about 20 years old when I got a car. And at that time, things had changed so much up in Missouri Valley. But there was a transfer company up there called Johnson Transfer, and she was always ahead of everything, the Swedes. So whenever something went on, she'd come down here and pick us up, take us up there, and vice versa. They'd come down here. So that's how we got around. How many were living there, you think, all the Swedes, about 20 families, or? I would say more than that. Oh yeah, there probably was about 40, 50 families. Are there still some of the descendants up there? Not of ours. No, of other Swedes. Oh yeah, there should be some up there. I think that, I think Mrs. Johnson's daughter's still living there. But most of them, it's a small town, so most of them leave. It was a farming town. Yeah, oh yeah, it still is. So then you came down here to Council Bluffston to settle down here? Your father built a house then, or did he buy? No, he'd bought a house, but he couldn't get the people out, so he had to rent the house across the street for about a year before they got the people out of the house that he had bought. It was during the Depression then? Oh yeah. It was hard times. Well, 19, well, it was 1917. Oh, at that time. At that time, yeah. Yeah, 1917. See, I was only about a year old. A year old then, yeah. That was nine months when we moved in that house, and so I'd say it'd still be in the 1917s. So you went to school here then? Oh yeah. Did they join the Emmanuel Lutheran Church here? Yeah, yeah, that's the one we go to. They were, we remember, they're your family, I mean, your parents. So, and he continued to work for the elevator company then? Oh yeah, he retired from there, yeah. What happened then during the Depression? You were old enough, you were. Well, we were lucky enough to have a job, our dad did. He worked all the time? He worked all the time, but he worked only three days a week. But down there, they split it, so you worked, this one worked three days, and the other worked three days, and that way nobody got laid off during when it was real bad. But our neighbors all around, they were out of work. We had a fellow across the street that was a conductor on the railroad. If he'd get, he was always kidding Dad that he should get a different job, and he was one of these smart alecks. Dad says, no, he says, I think I'll still, I know what I'm doing, I got a job. So, I guess during about eight years of the Depression, he worked anywhere from none at all to one day a week. So maybe if he got in three days a month, he was doing good. Was he able to stay in his house then, or how did he survive? Oh yeah, yeah. Well, he got the house handed down to him by his, Parents? No, his wife's parents. Wife's? Mr. Jones. Oh, the way they were moving away from. And then not only that, Mr. Jones had lived with them, and he ran a transfer company. That's one way that they got by. But like I say, the. They were hardships. Oh, you betcha. What did they do with all those people without working? Did they have a soup line, the Salvation Army? Do you remember that? Them days they didn't have such things. You got along the best you could. There wasn't handouts then. Then like the WPA days, you heard of those. Back in the 35s and 36s, they had what they called WPA days, you went to work. There was only the young people, though, and the, no, the, the, the bad people. Yeah, there was just certain ones could get jobs on there that didn't have anything. The young people, there was CCC camps. Yeah, yeah, there was one on. Did you go into those camps, or did you? No, no, I was lucky enough to. To have a job. When us kids were about, oh, five, six years old, we always went over to a grocery store, and a little neighborhood grocery store just about a block from where we lived, and old Elmer, he took us under his wing, and that's my brother and I, and we'd do a little bit of work like sacking up sugar and potatoes and putting eggs in bags and sweeping the store and put the produce away at night and stuff like that. So there was a Swedish grocer? Yeah, he was a Swede. His wife was a Dane, and she was a hard-headed Dane, too. She was a meanie. But Elmer was okay? Elmer was a good guy. But, no, we. So you could continue there after you finished school, then, at his store or? No, no. Yeah, yeah. See, I worked for him until through school. While I was going to school, I'd go over in the morning, an hour, and bring out the vegetables and the fruit, get them out of the icebox, get that all set up, then go to school, come back. At noon, I'd run maybe two orders on the bicycle, and then at the evenings, we'd work till oh, six, seven o'clock at night, eight o'clock, got $3 a week for it, and then had to work four hours on Sunday, too, eight to 12, he was open on Sunday, all day Saturday, at $3. Then finally, when I got out of school, we. Did you go through high school, then? Yeah, well, I had to quit in the ninth grade, or 12th grade. I had an operation when I was in the 11th grade. What happened then? Well, I'd hurt it some way, and then the bone had died, and you could see how it pulled my hand down like that. So this bone's still crooked. They wanted another $500. Back in 32, that was a lot of money. And so, Dad says, and all he says, I can't afford that, but this was over $2,500 just for the hospital and doctor bill. And there was no insurance then at the time? No insurance. Your dad didn't have anything from, he worked for a big company, though. Yeah, they didn't have insurance or nothing, no benefits in those days. Nothing at all. How was he able, then, to swing $2,500? Well, that's what I was gonna say. So I went to the hospital, I was in the hospital 19 days, and X-ray, I had to go up every month and have an X-ray taken on this, make sure that bone didn't turn black, because they took a piece. They took all the piece down? Yeah, they took a piece out and took a piece out of the shin bone, down here, and put it in there. And so, they were, the doctor wasn't so much as what the hospital was, but they were pushing dad pretty hard. He'd probably give them maybe $10 a month or something like that, but the hospital was pushing pretty hard, so dad says he didn't want me to quit school, but there's no other way he could see it. So I went to work for old Elmer, and I got $12 a week then. So I put $10 each week, one week would go to the hospital, and the other one would go to the doctor, and we just kept that up till we got it paid for. How were you able then to manage with the arm? Did it hurt you or? No, it never bothered me, and he only had, instead of, you know, you got this bone up here? Well, this come down with a big knot here. Instead of the bone growing up this way, it just all formed down here. So evidently, it hurt it when I was a little kid. But then my brother, he went to work for his uncle up in Waterbury, Nebraska, when he was about, well, he got just out of grade school. He didn't get to go to high school at all. My sis got to graduate. So we had it pretty rough, but like I say, we were lucky enough that dad made $13 every week during the Depression, and dad had the house, what he owed on it was to a friend of his, and so they were pretty nice to him. Whatever he could get together, the interest and whatever little he could put with the interest paid off on the house that way, because these people were more to look for the interest on it, so. So you could sustain, and how long did it take now before you were completely recovered in this arm? About a year? Oh, no, about six months. Six months. But you worked all the way from the after operation and on. And I've been, yeah, like I say, when I was about six years old, I started in this grocery store, and I worked up till about, well, I was 69 years old when I quit. I'm 70, oh, I was just 71. How long did you work for this Elmer in the grocery store? Oh, till I was about 21. 21, oh. Then I got a job delivering groceries up in a big store uptown, and then we went from there. Where did I go? I went down 21st and C and learned to cut meat. So I ended up being a meat cutter for, up until the war, World War II. Then I went to the railroad for four years during the World War II, and they wouldn't take me because I didn't, now, like I say, I got good movement in my arm, but the doctor, he grabbed me right here, and he says, now, he says, let's see you move it. I couldn't do it, so they wouldn't accept me in the service, so I'd take essential work, like railroad or something like that. So they sent you to the railroad then? Yeah. We've been pretty lucky. And then after the railroad, after the war, then, what kind of work? I went back to cutting meat up until, oh, it was about 70, 70, about 69 it was, I guess. Until you retired? No, then I went to, to Walgreens and run a liquor store. Oh, I see. For about 16 years. Uh-huh. So, and your dad, now, he continued all his life for this elevator company? Yeah, just for the elevator, yeah. The last four years, he ended up being night watchman, so he worked a little bit past his 65, because Social Security was nothing in them days, just a little token, like a 45, $50, or something like that was all. And how about his insurance? Well, then another thing is, mother was lucky enough, she took in laundry, and she would take, well, that was during the war and after the war, she'd make, well, about 40, 40, yeah, about 40, 41, she'd take in as much as dad made at the railroad, but he was making his full 40 hours then. His check went in the bank, and they lived on what she made. So he was able to save them. Yeah. Did he take out any insurance then later on in his life? No hospitalization? No. No, he died. He didn't have to go into hospital? 1960, no, he was. Something along the way. You know, it's funny, we'd come home, we lived about, well, like we lived here, and they lived around the corner on the next block. And every night, we'd go over, or they'd come over to us. Well, we'd been out there, my wife's folks out of Crescent, and we got kinda late, so we says, no, we won't go, stop at the folks tonight, and we'll see them tomorrow night. And the four o'clock in the morning, mother called up. She says, John, she says, I think something happened to Papa, and he'd had a heart attack. But, so mother, she lived alone for. So he died then? Yeah, he was, yeah. He was dead. And then mother lived till day after her birthday in 62. And, but she was in the hospital about 30 days was all. But hers was just, old age was all, her just failing illness. Like I was telling my wife yesterday, it's funny, you hear all about these Alzheimer's diseases and all these people living in these, in rest homes and stuff like that. They didn't have those things back in them days. Everybody stayed home or else they had somebody come in and look in on them for two or three times a week. They took care of themselves? Yeah. Now mother, she lived alone all the time. She wouldn't, we tried to get her to come live with us, only a block away, no. She had nothing to do with that. And I always said to my wife that dad would go first. And well, I said, no, your dad's too healthy. I said, you're gonna find out that dad's gonna go before mother did. I just had that feeling all my life. It's something like that. In 1923, you got some visitors from Sweden. Oh yeah, that was Swedes folks. Your cousins. Yeah. Do you remember that date when they came off the station up there at the Kanselblad? No, I really don't remember that, but my aunt Hilder come a few years later, I remember her. Oh, you don't remember when the- Well, see, I was only about six or seven and kids, what do you- You don't remember that? I can remember her coming and staying at the house or staying with us for, oh, maybe a couple of months, three months, something like that, till I got a house and got a job and all that. So then you had to talk Swedish. Well, I didn't. You didn't? But how could you talk to a steward? Well, you picked up a few words. That was the worst part when we went over to Sweden now. Now my cousins I couldn't talk to, but their kids, they talk just like you do. English. Yeah. How old are you? 59. Are you 59? I'll see my cousins over there about the same age as I am, see. So they couldn't talk then? No. Well, my cousin could, but his wife couldn't. And all she'd say to Vala, she says, that's too bad, I can't talk. English, you're just like my sister. They got along real good. But the younger ones could. Oh, yeah. I got one of my cousins, a cousin's boy, he was nine years old when we was over there. And he wouldn't talk any Swedish at all. You couldn't get him. He'd get, my wife, he fell in love with her. Got her in a corner and he'd just talk it. And sometimes he'd mix a little Swedish in. Because he says, I want to learn so I can get to go over to America. He says, no matters. But now if you go back then to the 20s when I came here, Stewart and Ola, do you remember playing with them? Oh, yeah, oh yeah, that way, yeah. But you couldn't talk Swedish then? No. The kids, they picked it up real quick. They did? Oh, yeah. They had no trouble at all? No. But they lived with you though for a couple of months? Well, I'd say two, three months or so. Before they got their own place? Uh-huh. Yeah, they moved in the old red brick house across the street from us. So you became a classmate of Ola then? No, she was behind me. She was? Yeah. See, I'm I think a year older than her. That's right, yeah. Or two years older than her. She was five. So, see, she was five when she came over here. And see, that'd make it 18. 19, 18, so that's six. Were there many Swedish families that the consulate blocks would send children to school? You had schoolmates that were Swedish? Oh, yeah. Quite a few? Yeah. Yeah, there was a, well, right in where we was at, I would say there was at least 60, 70. Well, they probably weren't neighbors to one another, but in a four or five block radius, there were 60, 70 families of Swedes. Scandinavians, anyway. Did they mingle together? Oh, yeah, that's what I said. They'd have this church and you'd always have- Immanuel Lutheran. No, just going to the houses. Oh, to the houses. Yeah, every Thursday night and have their services. Here in House of Loves? Yeah, yeah. Why? Oh, yeah. We'd go from, say, it'd be at our house one day, then we'd go to Swedes' house, folks' house, then we'd go to Headland's, then we'd go to the Petersons' and the Larson's and the Nelsons', the Stenstrom's, then the other Johnsons', then, oh, there was so many of them. You probably had one service, or three service a year in your house while you was going to a hall. Who was the pastor then? What was the- Oh, I did know his name. He was... He was from Omaha. Oh, he came over from one of the Lutheran churches there? Yeah, mm-hmm. And then the church was started in what year? Oh, that finally broke up and we went... Now, see, our church up here is 96, 97 years old now. It started 97 years ago. Yeah, that's Emmanuel. Yeah. Yeah, that's not... Why didn't they go to... Two years ago... Well, I tell you, we had- Why didn't they go to the Emmanuel church? They had a minister named Anderson, and the Swedes didn't like him because he wasn't a Swede. And so they went around and finally it... They wanted a pure Swede. So what happened in the meetings in homes? Did they start a congregation from there? No, no, no. It is a lot. Just, when they got a new minister up there, they all went back up to the church. That's just like now here about, oh, 18 years ago, 15 years ago, we had a minister, and he almost lost our whole church. All he wanted to do is preach as fast as he could, jump in his car and take his golf clubs and go down and play golf. He'd never go around doing any visiting. You call up the church, want him, you couldn't find him. So they were all different. Yeah. And so we were just on the verge of doing the same thing, going around to houses and having meetings. But then finally they got rid of him. And when the board found out that they really meant it, well, they got rid of him, got Pastor Bard in then. And he brought it back. The congregation together. Yeah. Well, I suppose he- Like my wife says, now we've had Pastor Larson up until last, well, it'll be a year ago he left. And why is that just because you don't like a minister, now, when he gets away from church, he goes up to hospital and he visits you at the house, he does everything, but they didn't like his sermon. Too long or too short? No, it wasn't what they, it wasn't out of the Bible. Also the contents were not good. And, but otherwise he was a prince of a guy. But there were some of them that figured they couldn't get nothing out of his sermon. So they quit going and they quit going, quit going. Well, he'd been there 10 years, on his 11th year. So, but now we got a guy that's from Burlington, Iowa. He come in, I think it was in June. And he's a real nice guy. He's 56 years old. How were you able to keep this along over 10, 11 years, if he started to fail you? Well, I don't know. But now to us, we liked him because he was the kind of guy that if you needed a minister, he was right, you know, if he was in hospital or he was this, he was right there with you. Or if you had trouble in the family, they were there to help you. He was nice that way. But then somebody was checking out the sermons. But he himself left. He says he'd been here long enough, he wanted to go. He wasn't like this other guy, just give a short sermon and collect his money and go play golf. And the funny part of it is, there was one guy in the congregation when this guy left, this old swanic, wanted the choir to take up enough money, so he was buying him a set of golf clubs for a going away present. He's going to Coons Memorial now. He found out, if the minister was going to get a set of golf clubs, he's going to have to give them to him himself, nobody else was. He didn't collect a penny. So how, so your parents, now did they go back to Sweden at any time? No. They were not able to visit again. Did they talk often about Sweden? Oh yeah. Yeah, they would like to went and us kids would like to, but we never got up to where we could really afford to send them. Like I said, most money dad ever made was $35. But back in them days, that was pretty good wages. 90 cents an hour. So your mother, she was happy then when the Stewards and the Dollars mother came, because there was a sister. Yeah. She was happy to have her close. The Swedes mother and then the sister come later, four or five years later, it was twins. One was real little, Swedes mother was one of these petite gals and Hilder was more of the heavy, or not heavy, but taller and stouter person. They didn't look like sisters or anything. So, and they lived close together then? Well, Hilder lived with them. Well, Hilder lived with my folks, I would say the first 20 years. And then Esther, our Swedes dad, run off to Washington. Then she went down to help her sister because she didn't have much to live on. Only once in a while he'd send back maybe a $10 bill or a $20 bill. So they helped each other then? So that way, yeah. So she, instead of my aunt really getting anything when she passed away, she had nothing left. She lived in a rest home here for two, about three years. So she came into the rest home then? Yeah, well, so did her other sister. So Swedes mother was in a rest home. How did he get this name Swede? You never called him Stewart? I don't know, why? Because there were so many other Swedes, you would think they would get that name. We never called him Swede, we always called him Stu. Stu? Stu. Now Stu, that was the name in Sweden. Yeah. We just called him Stu. Now my oldest boy's father-in-law's name is Stewart, and I call him Stu too. So he had that name when he came to school then? Well, I think that's where they laid it on to him, is when he was in school, is Swede. And they stuck with him. Yeah, still there. And now it's on his business card. Yeah, just like my old brother's back. The interview continues next site. Next site. Sun 2. How about politics now? Swedes father, he was a Democrat. Oh yeah, my dad was, if they'd run a dog on the Democrat, he'd vote for him. All the way. Your father was a Democrat too? Oh gosh, yes. I see. Oh. But most of the Swedes were Republicans though, weren't they? I don't know, but boy, Dad. You were a Democrat? When you mentioned a Republican, boy, that was, that would be like, see we had a, a president named Herbert Hoover. You probably heard of him. He was an Iowan. Oh yeah. Yeah, he was from Iowa. West Bench. Yeah. And just as you went out my back door, I had a, oh, I had about 15 roses. And this one rose was a beautiful thing. Dad says, gee, I'd like to have that rose. Have a rose just like that. He said, what do you call it? And I never would tell him it was a President Hoover. And I said, well, I'll get you one next year. And I always said, next year I'll get you one, next year I'll get you one. And I always said, well, they didn't have any in this year, maybe next year they'll get one. But if he had known it was a President Hoover, he would have said it was the ugliest rose. So they named the rose after Hoover? Yeah. Yeah, President Hoover. Oh, it was a pretty thing. Matter of fact, I got one out in the backyard now. So he didn't like him? No, he's the one who started the soup kitchens. That was during the real depression. How about you now? Did you also become a Democrat? I'm registered Republican. How come? How come? Well, my wife used to work for a doctor in town here. And he was running for a sheriff on the Republican ticket. And, no, on the Democratic ticket. So in the primary, you gotta vote, if you're a Republican, you gotta vote Republican. But in the regular election, you can break it up. So I voted as a Republican. So I voted for the poorest Republican, trying to get the best Republican beat, because a lot of us did that, because we didn't like him. But he made it, and Dr. Moore never got in. And I'd never have gone up and changed it. No? No, I'd never change. But now we don't go by Democrat or Republican, only in the big elections. So now, local elections, now, your son was a few years ago, eight years ago. About eight years ago, yeah. The youngest mayor in Council Bluffs history. He was only 30, 33? I'd say about 32, 33, something like that. So, and he was a Republican? No. No, they don't vote, that's what I say. They don't declare the color? No, no, just, uh-uh. Don't worry. No. So how was he elected now? Did he run for office, did anyone else say? Well, see, what they do, they vote three this year, three councilmen, and then in two years, they vote for two. So you have five, five run in the city. And then the oldest one, it's on there as a rule, they make him mayor, or head of it. Or not the oldest person, but the first one voted in. So each one gets a crack at the mayor as they go. So he ran as an alderman first? Well, they didn't call him the councilman, they called- They called the councilman, yeah. Yeah. And so, but he was gonna run this time, but he just didn't have too much work to do. See, he's sales manager at Nog Paper. So he was still interested in politics? Oh yeah. And his son is graduating from Iowa University as a political major, and that's what he's thinking about getting into. But first he's gonna, you know, get into something else for a while and then go to it. So were you also interested in politics? No, that's the furthest thing from my mind. I couldn't take it. Especially like Denny says, you'll be sound asleep two o'clock in the morning, three o'clock, four o'clock, somebody will call up and says, I want this done, I want that done. Why don't you get this done for me? So. But he was not afraid to tackle it, though. Yeah, he was in there for four years, five. Four years. Four years, yeah. So what happened during his term in office? Did he do anything for the city that benefited the town? Oh yeah, he did a lot of, didn't, in that part of the time, there wasn't too much you could do as far, because the city's always been pressed for money. But you have a lot of people living here and working in Omaha, though. Oh yeah. So they're taking a lot of money on that account. Yeah, if it wasn't for working in Omaha, this town wouldn't be as big. Although you have a lot of people living in Omaha to come work over here, too. But there's more people working in Omaha. Mm-hmm. Oh yeah, I would say three to one. I'd say 25% of our people live. Is it cheaper to live in Iowa compared to Nebraska? I think it is, because I've worked the last 25 of my years was working in Nebraska. And when I hear what taxes they pay in all, now in my car, I only pay $18 a year. Over in Nebraska, you pay $12 wheel tax, you pay $15 for a license, then you pay property tax on top of that, or personal tax. So it runs anywhere from 40 to $260 a year for a car. Well, they're depending on the age of the car. Age of the car, yeah. But your wheel tax and your license are all the same. $15 for the license, and now they want to raise the wheel tax to $18. It started out at $6, $4, then it went to $6, and that was only supposed to last for four years till they got some streets fixed, and then they were gonna take it off. And that was 35 years ago. And they're still- They haven't fixed them yet. No, haven't got them all fixed. The wheel tax now, that's for the city of Omaha. Yeah, now they wanted to do over there that if you worked in Omaha, you had to pay the wheel tax. So Mr. Kettleman, this was a few years back, he said, well, that's all right. He said, let them go ahead and charge this wheel tax. Tell you what we'll do, he says, we've got a three to one ratio. We'll just, at that time, it was $4. We'll just charge them $12 for driving over here, and we'll just stand at the bridge and pick up everybody. If they don't have $12 to buy our tax, turn them around, send them back to Nebraska. So then they changed their mind. Who was it then? It wasn't that tax against them. Yeah. But no, I've always liked this town myself. I've always liked this town myself. Now, since a few years back, you also have a dog race. Yeah, about three years. Bus run, they call it. Yeah, bus run. And this taking over the business from Exurban. Oh, it took a lot of business. Yes. You know, when they first- I didn't expect that. No, when they first started, they says, oh, that won't bother us at all. But they lost about 25% of their take. The last two years. Yeah. Last two years. They're gonna- So there's a big business there for Tom. Oh yeah. But I've only been down there once, and that's when Barb and her husband was here from Sweden, and they wanted to go down, so we went down with them. They made money down there, but I lost money. My daughter and her husband, they did all right. So when your parents were living, did they have contact with Sweden? They wrote letters? Oh yeah. All the time? Oh yeah. But then when they died, what happened then? Did you continue? No, that was a funny part of it. We just, after the folks died, all communication stopped. And so I got one cousin in Pennsylvania, and she'd go over, they'd go over about every third year over to Sweden. Well, why couldn't they? And they make about 80 to $100,000 a year. So they had plenty of money to do it with. That was my uncle's daughter that lived up here on the farm. And so she married a guy that had a pretty good job, and she's got a good job now. So now that they're retired, they're gonna find out that it's gonna be a little bit different. Because the Social Security don't go as far unless they got a lot of it in the bank. But now we was sitting here one day, and we got a letter from Sweden. And Stefan wrote, and he said he wanted to get, was making up a family tree. In Sweden? Yeah. And he wanted all of ours. I don't know if that was sitting here or not. Put on that, and then so we finally decided to come over and see what everything looked like. And it was the first visit for Sweden then? Yeah. Oh. Yeah, that's how we got the... So did they have any idea where the Council Bluffs was now? No, no. It was a big surprise for him too. See, he went from here, or from Sweden, he went to my cousin, or my sis at California. And then he went to Kansas City, then he come up, that was an uncle down there. Then he come up here, visited here, and then he went, we wore him out. He was here two weeks. Went back to the Pennsylvania to spend three or four days. With your cousin there? Yeah, and all he did was wanted to sleep. So Lester called me up one day and he says, what'd you do to Stefan's after Stefan's had left? And he says, well, we didn't do nothing. We just kept him a little busy. He says, yeah, a little busy. He says, all he wanted to do was sleep. He was here. Was this in the summertime then, when it was warm and hot? Through midsummer. Oh, midsummer. Yeah, it was up there midsummer. Had to have those big old black curtains. And so you couldn't sleep at night. What part of Sweden are you? So this. This he built. What is it now really? It's a secretary. A secretary, oh. Got three drawers, and this shelf comes down and a little drawer up here. And what did you find in this in Sweden? My cousin Walter's where we stayed. In Sweden. That's the first thing, when we walked in the house, he says, this is yours. When you come home, when you go home, you can take it home, or you can take it anytime you want to. Which is. He says, the reason I've got it is because your dad's mother lived with us until she died. And I says, I got a bunch of her furniture. And that's how he didn't bring it over to America because he had no place to put it. And your dad never mentioned about it? Never said a word. Yeah, it was a surprise. We walked in and he said, this is what your dad made when he was 27 years old, I think. You would think he would be telling his son about things like that. We didn't know he did carpentry work because everything that had to be done up there, John had to do for him. He was afraid to tell you. Of course, over there, you get cement that's made out of wood anyway. I tell you, that was a wonderful trip. We both want to go back. I hope we can stay long enough to go back. These are pictures of all my cousins here. So you being not a Swedener, did you take English? I'm English and my dad was English. He was from London. And so I didn't have any Swedish at all, as far as I'm concerned. How did you get mixed up with the Swedes? With John? I don't know. How did you meet? He delivered some curtains to where I worked. That's where my dad lived. His mother used to do curtains. And his folks lived on this end and that kid slept, dad and his brother slept in that building. It was so fun to go see all these houses that he lived in. And this is the last house he lived in over there. So how long did it happen? You said he brought some curtains? Yeah, John's mother did curtains for to help with their living. And so John delivered them up to the place where I worked. And I went to the door and I don't know how we just started dating. Oh, John delivered some curtains up to where I worked. I worked for a doctor and his mother did curtains. And so he come up to visit me. What did you spill on you? Oh, I guess paint. He come up to visit me and to bring the curtains and we just started dating. I don't know, he just called me up and asked me for a date after he delivered the curtains. Now we've been married 48 years. 48 years, yeah. And then you came into a Swedish family. Oh yeah, wonderful people. Wonderful. What did they say on you, his mother? Oh, I was real skinny. I weighed about 107 pounds. And she told John I look like I had TB, that I wasn't too well. So we didn't pay attention to it. So she checked you over immediately? Oh yeah, boy. I could always tell when she was talking about me because I could get the viola part of my, my name's Viola. Yes. And she always said Viola. Viola. So when she was talking to his dad, I could always tell they'd say my name and I'd say, what'd you say about me? Now my folks always talked, my folks always talked Swedish. They did. But we understood it all. Oh, but you didn't answer back. But no, we talked American because we wanted them to speak American. They wanted to learn American, so. But they talked an awful lot of Swedish and I'd say, back up now because I'm not understanding what you're saying. And then pretty soon she'd say it slow to me. And I'd say, every time you talk about me, I can tell because I know my name. And so they got sort of smart. Well, we ended up the very best of friends. His mother and I were really close. So did you learn anything from her, like cooking or baking or anything like that? No, because I'm from a family of 11, too. So you had to learn early. So we learned when we were kids how to cook. That was our, we all took our turns, you know. So they want to be English cooking after he's been in here a while. Well, I like to go up to her house and they made all these Swedish dishes. Like Christmas time was so much fun. Swedish meatballs. So you went to his house then? Yeah, yeah. Siltan meatballs. Siltan meatballs. Lutfisk. Lutfisk. Did you eat all this now? Oh, I love it. I love it. Lutfisk, too? We had more fun when we were his cousins because she cooked all those things. She asked me what my mother used to make and I told her. What was her name? Walter. Oh. I know it as well as I know Mom. She said, you're just like a sister to me. I wish I could understand you. She couldn't. She couldn't. Oh, she told you that? Yeah. She couldn't speak American, but she said it to one of the kids. His aunt. His aunt. No, my cousin's wife. My cousin's wife. Oh, I see. She couldn't talk American, but he could. So she'd say things and he'd tell me what she said. But he said, you're just like a sister to me. I wish you'd stay here with us. They even offered us to, they got us sort of like an apartment upstairs. They even offered us to stay there if we'd just stay. So you mentioned potato dumplings. Was it Krupp Krocker? Yeah, Krupp Krocker. Yeah. Oh, your mother made those? Oh, yeah. And she made all of that stuff for us when we were there. I love the food. The only thing I couldn't get used to in Sweden is their milk that they use for breakfast food. What is that? Milk? What is that thick milk? That clabber. It's not buttermilk, you mean, but it's a different buttermilk. Yeah. It's real thick. They're real thick, clabber, real. They had to go up to the farm and get me milk because I could not dump that all in. How about you? I never did try it, though. You never tried it? But what got me was, you go in these stores and it was Kellogg's Corn Flakes, shredded wheat, American labels, Heinz ketchup, and things like that. And I never expected to find anything like that. And our grandchildren, they said, bring us all back a shirt with Swedish sayings on it. And this one is going to graduate now from school. He says, I want the worst saying you can find. Because nobody would know what it is, but I do. So we couldn't find nothing. Everything was American. Nothing in the way of Swedish shirts with writing on them. So when we finally did find, we found seven shirts. We found one for all of them, seven shirts. And they said, I can't remember what it was. Sunrise, the midsummer night, and was written in Swedish. And we found some, and darn if they didn't lose their suitcase with all that stuff in it. With all our gifts and everything we bought, we bought a new suitcase. It never arrived. And filled it up, and it never came in to the United States. It never came into New York. You haven't seen it yet? No. Oh, they paid us for it, so. They paid us, but you can't pay for it. But it's just like. No, because you. Because things that you bought. Bought for. Stamford had bought us eight little teaspoons, Swedish teaspoons. We bought crystal necklaces. And. Whoever took it knew it was a new suitcase, and they probably figured that it was a good haul. And it was. We really felt bad about it. So none of the kids got their souvenirs I had bought in crystal. So you'd have to go back again. Well, I guess so. To get it. You buy an old suitcase. Next time I'll put it in the old one. Put my clothes in the new. So how did you find the Swedes then? Oh, they're the most wonderful. Except this minute now, everything was fine. Yeah, they're wonderful people. We'd go back there and stay up one for our children. Really, we would. John would go back. I'd go back tomorrow if I had enough money to go. What was it now that really got you going? What was it that you liked so much? Well, the second cousin. The way everybody treated us. We were just like we were the king and queen of Sweden over there. They wouldn't let us do nothing. They wouldn't let us spend any money. The only time we could spend any money was when we bought some gifts for our own self or for the kids. We tried to put gasoline in their car. So when they come back here this year, this couple, I said, no way you're going to buy no gas. So they'd jump out of the car and go pay for it before John could get his gas tank filled. But they just treated us just like, well, they couldn't do enough for us. But I think they were so glad to see John. And when we had that family reunion, that was the most fun. They were all talking in Sweden. I couldn't understand the word, but he could catch some of it, you know? So how many were you then? Oh, I'd say there was about 30. Well, there's a picture of all of them in there. 30 all together with their kids. He had six cousins, and they all had wives. And some of their kids came, and all of John's kids were there. So they found their last cousin in the United States then? Yeah. We got a letter at Christmas time one year, and it was from Sweden. And I thought, oh my gosh, you think I've inherited some money that John's mother had left over there or something? And it was from this second cousin. And he said, I just found out I have cousins in Kamsa, West Iowa. And I'd like to come visit you. And oh my gosh, we were in our glory to think. And he'd come over. Then he wanted to name all our kids and all that. So he wrote that family tree, and he sent it to us. And then they showed us where his parents' folks were buried, and we looked up everything. That's all we did was history. And next time, we want to go and look at country. But we just started to get the history of it. His mom and dad never could afford to go back. And his dad always said, I hope someday you can go and go for me. So they'd been dead 25 years. And I said, John, we ought to go. We can't really afford to go, but let's go. We went. So there was 25 years since they died, then? About 60 and 62. And she died in 62. So there was a 25 years? Well, just about 25 years. So there was a 25 years blank then between the letter writing was done? Yeah, if Stephan hadn't have gotten in contact with us, we would have never known he had cousins over there. And we still get letters from over there. We get letters from all of them. We do find them. Oh, yeah. This has been wonderful. My kids just think this is, they want to go with us on a trip now. My one daughter and her husband want to go with us if we go next year. How about your kids now? You have three of them. I got two boys and a girl. And a girl. How are they brought up now? You have some English custom, of course, in your family. Well, they're mostly just all English. They're all English. And they all speak English, like we'd say we're all born here. But when the sun's up. Are they interested in the Swedes? Oh, yes, very much so. They want to make a trip. They want to make a trip. In fact, we would have went this year, but my daughter's daughter got married. And so that put that off. But see, we just get letters from them. And I save all my letters. And that's a couple of them just here this summer. They write American so we can read it, because otherwise we couldn't read them. We keep saying we're going to buy an English book or a Swedish book and start to learn some of it. I've sort of learned some of it, but not enough to really visit with the older ones. That's what's tough. We have to take the kids with us, you know, so they can interpret for us. And I'd rather learn some of it myself. When you met and started to date John here, were you in Lutheran then at that time? No, I joined after I. What kind of church did you belong to? My folks lived in the country, and we'd always went to the Latter-day Saints. But my folks would never let us join, because that isn't the church they wanted us to belong to. My dad was an Episcopalian, and my mother was a Christian church. So when I started dating John, then I just was baptized in the Lutheran church. Did his mother ask you, then, what church you belonged to or anything like that? No, she never mentioned it, I don't think. No, I don't think. The gifts were confirmed in this church, and just because that's where he went, I said, that's good, because I always wanted to be baptized. I wasn't baptized until I was four or five years old. You became a Lutheran? Yeah, because we went to church every Sunday, but not the church we really wanted to join. We lived out in the country where there wasn't just one church. What, in Iowa? Yeah, Crescent. That's about nine miles up. Seven or eight miles. I said north of? Yeah, north, on the way to Sioux City, Iowa. So they were farmers, then you were? My folks were, my dad was a section foreman on the railroad. And so we lived in a railroad house, and we lived out there for 30-some years. And then when I come in town and went to high school, then we worked our way through school. We had to work our way through. We didn't get to go to school. And then I was working in town when I met him. Came into Council Bluffs to work. Yeah. His folks were very nice people, very nice people. In fact, didn't your mother, was she in New York for a while, and then she came to Sioux City? No. She ended up in Chicago? Chicago, Burwin, just outside Chicago. And then Esther Stewart's mother came over after she was over here. Yeah. Oh, yeah, after. Yeah, they came over after. Then Hilder come. So your parents then came in before the war? Oh, in 1913. 1913. Both of them came over in 1913, or 1911. We went to the Immigration Bureau when we were over there, and we tried to find what the day his folks left. We couldn't. We didn't know exactly the month. So we didn't know where to look in the books, and we went through those books and went through them. We went through books on after another, and we couldn't find. We didn't want to take any more time, so I said we can always check that out next time we go back, because we want to know the exact date they left over there. 1911, because they got married in 1913. They always wanted to go back home, and I've always felt bad they never got to go, because we really enjoyed it. And we went all over the country they lived in, all over. Did they tell you before they died what it looked like when they came from Germany? Did they ever talk to you about the houses they lived in? Oh, yeah. They had a few pictures of over there. Not that many that I ever saw. No. No, but there's still some down there. I never did hear about that. You never did. See, back in those days, the camera wasn't very. They didn't take. You take 60, 70 years ago, there wasn't very many pictures taken. So you didn't meet anybody that remember your parents then? You didn't meet anybody old people, old one over there? Over there? Yeah. Oh, yeah. Yeah. They remember your mother. I tell you what. I tell you the best part. Yes? Not your mother. No, not mother, but dad. His dad was quite a Casanova. He had girlfriends all over. And his cousin has got letters that he's written to his girlfriends even. He's sweet. And he's got his dad's Bible, which someday I'm going to ask if he would like, if we could have it. But I don't want to say anything now. They're 66. Now here, this gal here, she's got a sister in Omaha. We were sitting there talking to her, and she was telling us about all the girlfriends dad had when he was over. She could tell you about that? And so when we got over there, he says, yeah, I'll take you up and show you a lot of the letters he wrote to his girlfriends. He says his mother does that. So after they went home, then he got the letters out, showed us. We sat one night up in our bedroom for three hours or so going through his dad's stuff. Did you get anything then, like a souvenir? No, I figured that. So the secretary, you were not able to get that with you? No, we didn't want to take it. They've had that in their house for all these years. But I said, someday, I'm going to just send the money over and ask for it. But I don't want to ask for it now. It's sitting in their house all these years. But they offer it to you? That's the first thing he's come to. You show him your cane? No, this is the apartment upstairs. Yeah, I've got a cane from, he had two canes of my uncle, or my grandfather's. And so he gave me one. And so we went to get on the airplane. And he goes, click, click, click, click, click. Guy looked at me. I says, here, you take this cane. And so I goes through again. I said, I knew what it was. It's pure silver. And there was enough silver there to make it go. Did she go in? No. So you got the cane with you then? Yeah.