 This is cassette two, the continuation with Mrs. McBride in Omaha, Nebraska. 13th of October, 1997, cassette two, side one. So, is there something that you remember of special interest from that voice there? I caught up on everything, all the new things. You see, radio and transportation and science. We went through the science building, of course, three times. And my husband, of course, knew everything anyway. So, we went through with three different sets of people. His folks went with us the first time, and another couple went with us another time. And then my sister and somebody else went with us the third time. And as we went around to all the booths, my husband would explain, because he knew what they were all about. So, that's one reason, of course, that the world made such an impression on me. And then, because of the things that I had learned previously in school, science, that science building was just great. And you caught up on today's world. So, what you saw there, that was going to come in the general household a few years later? Yes, yes. When people had the money to buy it. But you were able to buy some of those new modern things, though, because you had a pretty good... Well, we had a modern house. We had everything. We had a beautiful house. So, you were able not to pick up a better radio down there, nor TV, was your only... Well, of course, my husband always... Improved things. Yeah, whatever he bought. I know that when we were first married, everything had come out of the TV and be on the dining room table. And then he'd have some kind of little plan thing made. He always took out a couple of tubes and always added a couple of tubes, I said. But anyway, he kept everything modern. And he kept the piano in tune. He put two organs together. We bought an old-fashioned organ, and a friend of ours said, you have to have two manuals. So, he got Lyle another organ. And my husband put those two together to make one organ. And I've got it, and I'm going to move it. And in order to tune the two together, he had to shave off copper, you see. So, tone, so that the whole... Now, that was... Of course, he had a good ear. And he put those two organs together so we could play them together. And then, of course, so we could play with the piano. But he was very... My husband was a very remarkable person, I think. So, at Edwardsville, you can also pick out the new vacuum cleaner that was going to be... Oh, everything. You have a vacuum cleaner, and you might... I took a Hoover vacuum cleaner, and I still use it 60 years later. Is that right? Those Hoovers that they built in those days are just as good as any that they build today. And I've still got my two Hoovers. My husband bought another one later. But those two Hoovers, they run, and they're just as good as they ever were. Was there something else that you remember you bought for your household to make your kitchen work easier? Utensils and so forth? That you liked at the World's Fair, for instance? No. I had an electric stove. My husband was working for the power company. I had an electric stove. When we were first married, we had an icebox. But then that changed pretty soon to an electric refrigerator. And we had a car. Did you have wall-to-wall carpet at that time? Or was it just a rug in the middle and a wooden floor? Well, there was good flooring put down in that house. And we did have a rug that, well, practically only about six inches. So we had a very large rug. And the rug in the dining room covered the floor. Of course, we had a tile bathroom. We had, essentially, that house was just as modern as anything today. When did you get your first electric washing machine? In the 40s? No, I think it must have been much earlier than that. I had an electric ironer. And I had that from very early. Because after my boy was born in 29, and, of course, with drying, they were rough and everything. Everything was ironed in those days. And I did my ironing at night sitting in front of that ironer downstairs. And Lyle worked as his workbench. So we just had a nice time. He was working at his workbench doing things, and I was sitting here ironing. And we could just talk and visit. So I know I had that from 29. And I still got that mangle because it's great for ironing. You know what that is? Everything had to go through the mangle or be ironed. Yes, otherwise it was rough. There was nobody that skipped it. Most everybody. And all the clothes that my children had had to be starched and ironed. And I hung my clothes out on the clothesline, and I couldn't hardly get enough line up to find room for all the clothes. And I dried them outdoors. And I must have dried them inside in the wintertime. I suppose I hung them up in the basement. That was the usual? In those early days, that's what you had to do. It took a few years until the dryer came into. I can't remember when I first got a dryer. In fact, I don't think I had a dryer until we moved out here. I don't recall having a dryer. We had a water softener. But I don't think I – I think we got a new washer and dryer when we moved out here. So your husband, he continued to work then for the power company? He worked for the power company until he died. Well, no, until he retired. How old was he when he – He was 65. 65. He didn't have too many – just a couple of years. But we traveled a great deal. We enjoyed things. So we traveled over Europe. We had at least three trips all throughout Europe. And we made every state in the United States. And we were in Canada. We traveled whenever vacation time came. We went somewhere. Like your parents now, did they travel – were they able to take vacations? No. No, they never – They never asked for it? They never – they just stayed – Dad would have gone more. I think Dad would have liked to have gone. But Mother was kind of just staying home. They never went fishing for a weekend? No, Dad never fished. No hunting either? No. No. He never had any interest in those. So their generation, they were homebound, so to speak, more than the next one? Oh, yes. I think so. Like your generation, they were more look around and find out what things were public about places? Yeah. Oh, yeah. I think, yes, my generation, they – How about politics now? You were talking about you had a good Hoover vacuum cleaner here, but there was one Hoover that didn't do it so good, though, in the 30s there. Well, you see, of course, now – and we were for Hoover. Your parents? Yeah. There was a division in the family, kind of. I mean – well, no, it was mostly in my cousin's family. I had one cousin who lived on the farm, and he hated Hoover. Of course, you know how hard it was for the farmers. So he hated Hoover and would have nothing to do with Hoover. And the husband of my other cousin was a Republican, and he was for Hoover. And one time when I was up at Sioux City, and he was giving Mother and me a ride, and he said who I was for or something like that, and I knew how strongly he felt. So for fun, I said I was for Roosevelt. And he almost put me out of the car. I'm kidding, kind of, but anyway. And I laughed, you know, because it was just about that serious. So they were serious? Oh, the people were for Hoover. They were for Hoover. And the people that were for Roosevelt were for Roosevelt. A very strong feeling. I didn't have such strong feelings at that time. You know, I was just a teenager. But in general, the farmers, they looked for some new hope. Well, you see how many lost their farms. It was at least as bad as this time. And the government offered no help, did nothing. My cousin, who lived on the farm, and we went out there quite a lot, only got in $10 in cash one year, and they burned the corn. And she had canned and had a garden and their chickens, and they got along on all that. And she made overclothes for her kids because she could, and they were, both of her children, one of them got two degrees and the other one became a teacher. So, you know, they really got their education all right, and she raised a good family. But those were awfully hard times. And if you didn't have a job, you didn't have, there was no opportunity. But the people on the farm, they were able to stay on it if they... No, they lost it. They lost it. What happened to them? A lot of, well... Did they have to move them to the city and try to get something? Yes, I suppose. They moved in together with some friends? Oh, so many people lost their farms. It was at least as bad as this time where people lost their farms. Like the church now in Sioux City, the covering church, did they try to help anybody with... No, I don't think so....getting them a job or... No, no. There was no way to pass the door. They were church, and that was it. They didn't mingle with politics? No, absolutely not. They still don't. The covenant church never messes in politics. They stayed neutral. Well, their business was spreading the gospel and the Bible, and that's what they stuck with. They stuck with that. Do you remember if anybody moved west to California from Sioux City area during the Depression? Well, you were not there then. You were already here in Omaha. I was here in Omaha. But you had good context over your home, I suppose. Well, we went up there about once a month. We drove home about once a month. Did they come down here to visit you? Well, they didn't come down so much because of driving over 100 miles. Well, I wanted to get home. Talk with mom and dad? Well, I wanted to go. Anyway, I know that we... That was your home? That was my home, and I wanted to go back. And then we spent, of course, a lot of weekends with these folks in Blair. We were very close to our parents. So you had three children, one boy and two girls. And they were born in what time period? Ten years? No. My son was born in 29 and my daughter in 31, and my Carol was born in 35. So could they spend time then with your grandparents? Oh, yes. I think they have lots of memories of my mother and father. And, of course, they spent lots of time in Blair, and my son in particular. You see, he took the place of their son Lyle almost, you know. And he was very close. He used to spend quite a little time out with his grandfather. And they went to high school here in Omaha then? Who? All your children? Yes. They all graduated from Central. And then you went on to higher school. Yeah. My son won a scholarship to Cornell. There was a... He won several scholarships. But the one was offered by Pepsi-Cola, and anybody, private or public school, could compete. And he had the highest grade in the United States. In what? In all the subjects then? Well, in the contest. In the contest. Yeah. He had the highest grade in the whole United States. When the principal called up and said he'd won, well, I figured he'd won for Nebraska. And then something, the way he put it made me wonder a little bit. When I asked Lyle, I said, did he mean the whole United States? And Lyle said yes. And his name was? Lyle E. McBride, Jr. And he won that... He won with the highest grade in the whole United States. So he went on then to... He got his four years at Cornell. And then it was a five-year course, so then he had one more year at Cornell. And he became a... He's... Yes, he's become... He's an electrical engineer. And after he graduated... He married shortly after he graduated, and then they went to work for Procter & Gamble. And he built... He built tide plants in France and England and Belgium. And then he was sent to the Philippines. So they and the children in the early years, you know, spent around those countries. And then when Lyle III was ready for school... He's the oldest son. And he... Why he didn't want him growing up in a foreign country. He wanted him an American. We're all strongly American. And so then he went back to... He went to Harvard. And he got his doctor's... His master's and his doctorate at Harvard. And then he taught at Princeton for three years. And then industry pays better, and he had a family of six children. And he went to work for Texas Instruments. And he worked for them until... This is his third year of teaching, and he's a professor. And this year he was chairman of the engineering at the University of California at Chico. So he's really been busy this year. And his children... He had six children. Six children. Your son? Yeah. And... But his oldest son... That was Lyle III. And he was going to be a vet. And he'd gotten his education at Iowa State. And he was having a vacation out in California. And they were taking pictures, you know, or something. Anyway, he fell. He fell over a precipice into a lake. And, of course, that's been a very... So he was killed? Oh, yeah. And the first notice... The three boys, or four boys, went out there. And three of the boys, of course, after they reported, and they couldn't do anything, and they drove back to Iowa City as quick as they could. And Lyle got the notice from the coroner. That was a sad happening. Well, of course, he was a wonderful kid. He was a very exceptionally fine kid. And he was going to be a vet. And he would have started school that fall. But... So they have... So that was a tragedy. Achieved high honors then and good schooling. Huh? Achieved high honors and good schooling. Yes, and Jane, the next girl, she graduated from New Hampshire, University of New Hampshire. And George graduated from the University of... Not Idaho. What's the next one? Oregon. Oregon. And Mavis married before she graduated from Kansas University. And Jane is in her third year in Iowa. She's going to be a vet, too. So they are. And Alan, he hasn't graduated, but he's been going to college. He still hasn't got his degree. So you have two daughters then. One is in politics. Yep. And she's lived in Omaha all the time. This is the next, the oldest girl. No, Nancy is my... Lyle is first, oldest. And then Nancy Allerman is my second daughter, is my first daughter. So she lives in New Jersey. The youngest one is the... And Carol, my youngest, is the state senator. So your youngest daughter, her name is Carol McBride. Yeah. Well, you see, when she was going to run for election, while there were so many people that knew us, we knew a lot of people, so it was politically a good idea to use the McBride name. So she could be identified. As Carol Perch, nobody would know who she was. I mean, a lot of people... So she married... She married Alan Perch, yeah. And, of course, they were married, you know. She was... Her boy, her youngest boy was about five or six when she first entered politics. How did that come about? Now, you were strong Republicans, both you and your husband. You came out of a Republican home. Well, and Carol's a strong Republican, and Alice was always Democrat, but then, you know, it didn't make that much difference. Her husband? Yeah. And, well, the Democrats, when Carol was running, my... You see, it's a non-political office, and I would go to Democratic things with Carol, things, you know, and they all liked Carol anyway. That didn't make that much difference. So she has served on three terms. This was her third term. In Nebraska... State legislature. State legislature. Mm-hmm. Oh. And has she won with the... She's always won with quite... A landslide or... Well, a good majority, always a good majority. Is she a conservative Republican? Very, very. She's just like her father. She's the daughter of her father. All my children reflect their father, and I'm glad. Are you more liberal, you think? No, no. It's not that I'm liberal, but they... He had high principles and values, and they all three do. I'm very strong on being principled people. So you have been in the limelight, too, then, of having a daughter. Oh, I'm just Carol's... Hanging on. I'm Carol's mother, you know. Well, they always look back, you know, where they come from. Well, if I'm in anything, of course, I get introduced. I mean, when I'm along, it's one of those kind of things. But I'm a member of the Benson Women's Republican Party, and I enjoy that very much, and that keeps... Well, this is the Benson area here? Yeah. Right here? Well... This is a Swedish neighborhood? No, no. Is it? No Swedish neighborhood in Omaha. No, Keystone is where my daughter lives, and that's 78th and Aurora. That's three miles west. And this... But this whole area, you see, there used to be a town of Benson. Yes. And, of course, this whole area then belonged to the town of Benson. Was it that big, though, so it was all the way out west? Well, it was all countryside, you know. But then there was a town of Benson, and all the adjacent areas then would be... So when you married in 1927, this area was country then? I think so. I didn't know anything about it. You never went up there? No. No? When the area where we got 45th and Hickory had been a cow pasture about two or three years before that, and it was in development, you know, by the Norton. They'd had a dairy. The Norton's had had a dairy there. And then when my daughter married and moved out to 78th and Aurora, why, we thought she was way out in the country. We thought, oh, how far out they are. Well, you know, 90th is about the dividing line in Omaha anymore because everybody lives out to 140th or 150th or way out, you know, anymore. Spreading out. Mm-hmm. But the city has grown. So it's a... Oh, we couldn't have believed all the development in west Omaha, you know, earlier. So it has been Sioux City, on the other hand, has been slowing up in growth. Sioux City, you see, still doesn't have such a big population. I don't know exactly what it is, but it for a long time, Sioux City, after I moved to Omaha, Sioux City really didn't change so very much. It didn't seem to me like it changed in population. But then I don't know how, I think in later years now it's been starting to grow again. I don't know. So the size of the packing houses and the industry. Well, you see, Chicago at one time, and I had an aunt who lived in Chicago, my mother's sister, and she was so proud of the fact that Chicago was the center of the packing house, you know, in the world. And she was so surprised then when it moved to Omaha. And it stayed in Omaha until all these independent packers started all around the country, you know. And then now Sioux City has first place as a packing center. So it is bigger than Omaha then? Well, it's very small because it has become decentralized. Omaha had a great big enormous packing plant. So you left it closed up in Chicago then more or less? Well, yes, yes. You see, civilization took over Chicago, so naturally it moved west. And it stayed so long here. But after this, you see, it used to be always concentrated in one place. And then, oh, quite a long while ago, I don't know how many years ago, they'd start one out in Iowa, and they'd start one out on, you know, all these individual independent ones. Well, then, of course, they drew from the main market, so that just dwindled. It was probably easier then to operate in the small city. Well, I think there were economic reasons for doing it. Because they were down on 24th Street here in Omaha, South 24th. East, yeah, around in that area. Around L Street. Yeah, south Omaha. I think a lot of it's been torn down, but it used to be an enormous area. You could probably smell it miles away. No, I don't. We lived on Hickory Street, and I don't think. So it was not too bad. They must have controlled that. You would think so sometimes, though, when they came from the south, the wind. Well, I can't recall that we ever. I don't know. Maybe sometimes we'd say we were smelling beefsteak on the hook. So this has been a beef-eating city. Oh, yes. Oh, yes. Well, America has always been a meat-eating, you know. Meat has always been important. It's only in these later years where they keep telling you you're not supposed to eat meat and all this kind of thing that people are always worried about diets now and everything. But 10, 15 years ago, nobody worried about a diet. How come you have been in so good health now and so peppy all the way? Because we always had a garden, and my mother knew how to cook. You see, I came from a home where I always had. I can't remember my mother ever making anything that didn't taste good. And we ate from the garden, and of course meat, potatoes, and vegetable, and dessert was standard. And coffee. Oh, yes. But it never hurt you? No. You had no liquor and no cigarettes? No, no, no. Mother wouldn't have anything, no liquor. How about your father? Did he smoke? No, no, no. No chewing tobacco? No, and we didn't ever have any pets or anything. Mother didn't want those kind of things around in the house. Well, you know, if you've got a cat going around or a dog going around, you know, you can't keep the same kind of house. So we never had pets, but while I had, we had cats. But my mother didn't want any animals in the house. Do you remember being sick in younger years? No. Not until later. And the darn doctors are the ones that made me sick. I was having a problem with my foot, and I thought I'd really find out about it because I was, you know, I, I, and I went to that darn doctor, and without testing, he said it was gout. And there was no reason for it being gout because it wasn't swelling, it was just hurt on the bottom of my foot. And they gave me this medicine, and of course I hadn't been used to taking medicines, and I had an allergic reaction to colchicine. It took me, I couldn't get on my feet for about six weeks. And I was just, you know, it was just funny, you're just weak, you can't do anything, and, and I took that darn medicine for something I didn't even have. And I've never had, um, um... So you stopped taking it then? Well, you see, he told me to take it for the period, and I did, and, because I didn't know, I didn't get the reaction. I see there wasn't any rash, it wasn't any usual kind of thing, so he said take it. And it was afterward that, um, well I... What happened to the hurt in the foot? Did it go away? I found out that it was, um, um, my metatarsal arch. I think I must have hurt it, you know, I didn't realize it. And all I did was, was, um, put things in my shoe. And then I, I did, in the beginning, because it was sore, I put another little one right under the arch, and... The interview with Hilfry McBride, Oman, Nebraska, continues next slide. Next slide. Next slide. Just at two, side two. And now you are telling me that you are also starting to build a house. I'm building an old lady's house, and it's going to be an unusual house. Um, I'll tell you, I'll even give you an invitation to come and see it, after about, well, sometime later in November, sometime, if you want. So there's under... It, um, they're painting, they're going to paint, I think start painting, varnishing, I mean, staining and varnishing today. How did you get this idea, though? All the people like to relax and don't worry about anything. I don't know. I think, I think it was a latent desire, but, and, and then, well, this house was, you know, I got too much... So your husband made the drawings for this house, too? No, no, no, no, no, no, we just moved here. Um, but I, I, this house is too much. Up until three years ago, I could, I took care of everything. I could keep up the yard and I could keep up the house and I didn't have to, I did my own snow shoveling, I did everything. And then, um, well, I, I fell, and, um, I, I, I just seemed plagued with problems the last three years, after, for some reason. But anyway, I decided that I wanted a smaller house, or I wanted a, well, I decided to build a house. An old lady's house that I could stay in and live in, no matter how, um, how I got, because the house will, it doesn't have any steps, and, um, the doors are big enough for... Did you design it yourself? I, uh, yeah, I told the architect what I wanted and the architect, uh, drew it up, and, um, um, I got a very bad contractor the first time. He knew I couldn't see so well, I can't see finely, you know, and, and why he ever did all the things he did, but they just, his family just said, you know, he's no good, you gotta stop him. And it was a family decision then, and when it was, the roof was on and it closed in, and the family said, you know, and then we stopped. Well, of course, um, well, I, um, anyway, it went into litigation, and, uh, so that stopped the building. But, uh, the contractor I have now, uh, Michael Walker, is as interested in building a, uh, has been as interested in building a good house as though it were his own. I think he has just as much fun out of it as I do. And, uh, there are some novel features in it because I asked for them, uh, and, and only my family have been in it much, and I, it's gonna be so much fun to show that house off to people because, uh, it does have some novel ideas. You know, what is it now that's all the difference, I mean... Well, I have, um, I have inside shutters, and, um, well, and then, of course, the fact that it's, um, it's solar and it has a heat pump, and, um, it's, um, it's just, otherwise it's a modern house. Have you read about those things and studied? Well, you see, I always did read magazines. See, that's been my, um, all my, you see, I've been kidded all my life about my reading because, you know, I, I... Do you always look forward and see for better things? Well, I always read, you see. I, I read all, before I, uh, when, before I was a teenager, I read all the books they'd let me read at the library up there in, up there in Morningside. You are never afraid to try something new? No. No, I'm a non, I suppose I'm a nonconformist. But my whole family is, and I raised them that way. I'm glad because I, you know, I always told them they had to do their own thinking, and, and, um, I always held them responsible, uh, for what they did. They hadn't better come home and tell me so-and-so was doing it so it was all right or something because they never came home with that idea. But they had a very fine father who had very fine Christian principles, and I think, I think he had a lot to do with it. But anyway, I always have, you know, I, I, I'm, you don't, I don't always go along with what everybody else says or does. And my children do their own thinking. Carol, Carol does too in the legislature. She's been pushed around, and they, I think she has great respect down there, because she stays by what she says. She has integrity, and she stays by what she says, and, um, she, she always thinks things through. Your daughter, Carol, now, uh, where do you get the name from, Carol? Um, she was born a couple days after Christmas, so she was our Christmas Carol. Oh, I see. Well, that's the reason you've been named her Carol. Yes. We, um, we thought that would be appropriate. There is no one else in the family with that name then? No, no. Oh. So did you decide it on their name or did your husband? No, we just, we just naturally... Took it out for the vote? No, we, everything just kind of naturally went together. We never had to decide or argue anything. We just talked about something. So when you married now and came into a complete new culture, your husband, he was a McBride and had long standing of way, way back. Will you tell me again about McBrides? They came very early. Yes. His mother was an Arnold and back in Rhode Island, there are many historical things. There's even an Arnold house back there. And they came, as I understand, came maybe as early as 20 years after Roger Williams settled in Rhode Island. And so, and they do have the history of the family all the way through. And it's just a very interesting history of the people that are involved in that family. And then Grandmother Irwin, because she married with Irwin, was of course very proud of her heritage, of her lineage. So how did your culture fit in onto this one? You with Swedish background? It didn't make too much difference. But how did you try not to raise your children? What did you bring into the family? I think my mother's training at the school of oral dent, like, of course my husband too, you know, we had standards and principles. And we just naturally expected the kids to live up to them and they knew it. And they knew that their father was a strong person and we didn't do so much talking about it. But they just knew some, that they were expected to do certain ways. So you were brought up in the Christian religious, in other words, you went to Sunday school and confirmation and listened to sermons. Oh yes. Did you expect your children to then? Oh yes, we raised them in a church. I think I said we went to this little Jennings Methodist church that was close to our other house. And it was a small church and really for a lack of leadership it failed. So we had to find a new church. And we wanted one that our children would get good training in and we finally decided on the First Presbyterian Church. And so my children all grew up in the First Presbyterian Church and they had a lot of activities, a choir and all those things, you know. And oh, we went to Sunday school, I mean we went to Sunday school and church every Sunday. And when they were in choir or in something, even if it was treacherously icy or something, we felt they had to be there. So they received all their religious training at First Presbyterian Church. Did you feel at home at that church too? Oh sure. You did a nice Swedish singing the hymns of Skog, Frykman and Hultman. Well, I guess I just accepted it. I suppose in high school, you know, I was mingling with everybody. You got a broad perspective. I suppose I had a broad view then. But what's interesting to me is that the songs we sang in English were the songs that I could have sang in Swedish. And sometimes, even over here, I go to the Covenant Presbyterian Church now, when certain songs, when they sing, I tell it to myself, I sing them in Swedish. Is that right? So they brought the same melody and the same rhythm? That's the thing that was so amazing to me was that the songs I learned in Sienforsen were the same songs that we were singing over here. Oh, so you felt at home then? Oh yes. Do you think the singing and the hymns means much to the one that goes to church every Sunday? Yes, I think the hymns mean a great deal. Sing them together? Yes, I think it's great for a church to do a lot of singing. Do you remember Hultmann, the Sunshine Singer? I don't remember him, but I know my mother thought a great deal of him. I remember what a reputation he had. So you never heard him in your church then in the city? If I did, I was too small to remember. He was really before my time. But I know my mother thought a lot of Hultmann. I remember her talking about him. Because he was performing with those easy songs you remember. Well, he wrote a lot of songs too, didn't he? Yes. So they worked out fine then with the religious life? There was never any complications, never any antagonism. You see, my husband was a Christian. He was an exceptionally fine person. He never put anybody down. Even when he knew the thing was wrong and he knew what was wrong, he'd put it to them like, you know, here was something he didn't quite understand or something. And they would immediately see their mistake, you see, but they wouldn't see it put down. And I know there were two or three instances when I was with him when that happened. Of course, he worked for the power company and the power company was strong. He was dealing with people, you see. He was the one who designed the systems, you see, and dealing with people and everything. So it has to be precise and all business. In your home now, did you use table prayers when you sat down to have a meal? Oh, yeah. You prayed before a meal and also after a meal? No. Only before? No. Yes, and afterwards we'd go. We'd take the food like not before. After you were married and your children? Oh, yeah. Well, my children know, yes, that's one of them we say. We sometimes say Swedish things. And I, well, they've learned quite a lot of Swedish things. So you put in a few words here and there. Oh, yes. How about your mother now when she visits your children, your mother? Did she put any Swedish in there that she was particular about that she learned or you don't remember? No, no. No games or anything like that that they learned years ago? I don't think so. No? We just lived and had a good time. But there was nothing special you remember? Nothing, uh-huh. Because, you know, grandmas, they usually like to have their words in, you know, you should do this and do this and so on. No, my mother never was that way. She never was that way. It was always based on you're supposed to do what's right, you know. And then, uh, what was her saying now? Det skulle vara ordentligt. Ordentligt, ja. Isn't that what that means? Yeah, did your children understand that? Oh, I tell them that all the time now. I mean, you know, lots of times. And that then. That's a command they understand. Yeah, because you can use it in so many ways. And, oh yes, they're all, in fact, I'm going to have that somewhere in my new house. I'm going to, I'm going to, uh. Det skulle vara ordentligt. Uh-huh, because, you know, they've heard it and everything. And I think it is, you see, I've learned to appreciate some of these things a lot more in my later years now than I, I just accepted everything, you know, as normal, no matter what happens. But you have had your mind open now in your senior years to see things that can be done better. Oh, yes. And that's what you want to implement now in your new house. Well, my new house is going to be. So it fits into a senior citizen. In other words, it can make it easy for you. Yeah, no steps and. Shutters so operated from inside. Yeah. And wide doors. Yeah. How about the bathroom now? You want to make any. Well, one of the bathrooms is going to have a higher toilet seat because my friends, you see, all my friends are in their 80s and 90s. And they can't use a normal seat. So one of them is going to be elevated. One of them is going to be what they call for the handy app, the higher kind. And the one in mine will be normal. Because after all, I've got twelve greats, twelve great grandchildren, and they've got to have a place to. So when you're old, the friends come together, they're going to have an easy time. Yeah. And be at your house. Yeah. I'm going to I am I'm looking forward. I think socializing and meeting other people is very important. And. Mel, as long as I'm talking, I'm going to be at home. So I'm going to have that old fashioned term, one of the third Saturday of every month and from one thirty to four thirty. And so that all my friends will know that, you know, they've got an hour or something they can breathe in and they'll get a cup of coffee or whatever they want and a little something to eat. I think that's one of the things we lack in today's world, is a chance to just visit with each other. Oh, coffee calas. Yes, that's what it'll be. It'll be coffee calas. There's something you remember from Sioux City. Yes. Your aunts and your mother. I think, you see, if it's just open like that... I have a lot of friends who I, you know, meet them casually, see them, and go. But I think it'd be nice if we could just visit. So I look forward to seeing everyone. And then I think everyone will... I hope there'll be enough so they can visit with other people. And there'll be... I have quite varied groups of people that I know, you know. So two or three or four groups will kind of get to know each other, meet, because there'll be that... just a friendly atmosphere for them to meet. So there's something that you remember then, way back, that your aunts and your mother, they felt at ease then when they come together over a cup of coffee. They could sit and talk and gossip or whatever was necessary. Well, they never gossip. But... There was like a newsletter, though. They get the ladies' newsletters. Oh, yes. They talked. What happened to him and so on. Oh, yes. It was... Because you got to know what's going on in the community. Yeah, well, we... And the funny part about it is that I don't remember being bored. You know, here I had to go and I had to behave. I had to sit. And I didn't dare put my feet up on the rungs of the chair. I knew that was a cardinal sin. Because, you know, they had nice chairs and they weren't going to appreciate somebody gnawing them. And I can remember that. But still being respectful and so on, you still have a good time to sit and listen to what they say. I don't remember being bored. And here I was, just one child, with my mother and my aunt. You know? And you could also sit down and drink coffee. Oh, I... You'd be one with them. Oh, I absolutely had my coffee and my nice big piece of cake. Do you remember if you put the coffee on the saucer and drank it? Oh, no, we never did that. You never seen that? I think my father used to do it sometimes. He did? And he had a lump piece of sugar? Yeah, yeah. Yeah, he used to like to do that. But, of course, I... You never did it? No. No, we were... We were supposed to have manners. And, of course, we were supposed to shake the hands of our hostess after we were through and thank them. And... Well, I don't know. But we were supposed to... And the other thing I remember this child was... You know, they always had a lovely sugar shell for the sugar. And once I forgot... Well, anyway, once I remember, I put that sugar shell in my coffee cup, in the coffee, and I thought, that's disgraceful life. But, you know, there were... There were some things, you know, you were supposed to have manners. At Christmas time, though, do you remember what time, how far ahead of Christmas did your father bring in the Christmas tree? Where did he get it? Well, I... I don't recall. I suppose we always had to buy it, of course, in later years. And I still got some of the ornaments that we used to have on the tree. Well, they were handed on then from the way back? Yes, when Mother... You see, I helped Mother get rid of everything in her house. She moved to live with my sister. And, well, you know, I've always kind of held on to anything I got in my hands. But they were used then year after year... Oh, yes....to decorate the tree. There is nothing special you remember. There was no Swedish things that you... that they sent from Sweden? No, no. What did you got from your aunts? Well, I've got a spinning wheel that came from Sweden. My Uncle Axel– or Uncle Olof– sent that to me. And a clock. I got that at Uncle Axel's death. I went over for the funeral. And I gave that to my son. And it was an old clock from... It was my Uncle Olof's clock. From Sweden. A beautiful clock about this big with chimes and just a beautiful thing. And he had that from the time– well, probably from the time he went back. The four brothers came over early and they spent all their mature years, you know, over here. And then my Uncle Olof, in his later years, had– wasn't feeling so well. And he thought going back to Sweden would help his health. So he went over and he bought just a small piece of land from the brothers that had stayed over there and built himself a cabin– a stuga. And he lived there. And then in later years, Uncle Axel went back. And then when the brother who owned the home back there died, his daughter didn't want the home. So Axel bought it. Uncle Axel bought it. And so that was where we stayed when we went back to Värmland. Did you meet him then before he died in Sweden? Oh, yes. We saw Uncle Axel. Uncle Olof died just before we got there on our first trip. So I didn't– It's too bad because he– You know, we were– Dad corresponded, and he– What did he say then? Did he miss Iowa? No, I don't know that they did. We didn't. He was homesick then, more or less. Maybe his wife was– Well, neither Uncle Olof or Uncle Axel– Uncle Charlie was the only one who married. Oh, I see. So they were bachelors then. Mm-hmm. We stayed about three times. We spent three times in that house. And then I went back for Uncle Axel's burial, for his funeral. Oh, I see. So by going back to Christmas now, do you remember what kind of preparations they had done? My mother? Yeah. You had lutefisk. Oh, yes. We always had lutefisk, and we had patatas cur. Sylta. Sylta. Toppa i grytan. No, we never did that. But– And my family– We still have patatas cur. We have that on– They don't like lutefisk. So we have patatas cur. So you brought the idea with you into your– Oh, yes. There's lots of Swedish dishes. And my mother's rye bread and– Oh, there's a lot of things. So you were able to bake the rye bread then? Oh, yes. It was handed on to you. And Riesgrünsgröt. You had that? Oh, yes. Rye, what do you call it? Porridge with an almond in it? You don't remember you had an almond in it? Yeah, I think my mother did it earlier. But you never carried on? I don't know whether I have ever– It seemed like I did it once for fun. But lutefisk was not able– You were not able to introduce that to your family? They don't seem to like it, but I always have it. I always get lutefisk. You had it since you were a little girl, of course. Oh, yes. Well, my mother just made a– She could cook it until it was still intact, you know, and then put it in a good cream sauce. Boy, was that good. And I've tried it, and with my microwave oven, I can cook it with the skin side up and then put it in the microwave, and it'll come out just fine. But your kids won't eat it? They– No. But I think– How do you explain that, though? Because it's a strange thing. You know, a lot of Americans, the second generation, the kids now, they don't like it. But you liked it when you started to eat it in your family. You never questioned it if it was good or bad. Well, I grew up on it. I know, but your kids, they had also to grow up on it. If they had started. Why do you think this is it? Who gave them the idea that they shouldn't– I suppose just because it's different, and they only had it once a year. You see, this is something they learned to have. How about your sisters now and– We all– All the family liked lutefisk. And your two brothers? Well, my brother and one sister died when they were so young. But my older brother– He ate it? Oh, of course. All our family loved it. But he moved to California, so I didn't get to see much of him after– Do you remember the first time you prepared lutefisk in your home for your husband and– Let us say, now, your two– Not really, because it was just part. But I did fix it. But they didn't get a taste of it? Maybe I didn't fix it good enough. Well, I'm sure you did. But it's strange, though. They don't seem to– Well, I tell you, I'm– What I think that I'll do is when– We always– I have Christmas with one of them always. Sometimes a family here, and sometimes in– My son, of course, lived in Norton, Massachusetts, when he was working for TI. And so sometimes I've gone back there for Christmas, and sometimes my daughters. And then once in a while, at Christmas time, you prepare your own little lutefisk. Well, when I was here– Yeah. Well, I always managed to get– I always have some every year. I, you know– For myself. And now you belong to Vasa. Yes. I'm awfully glad that– You see, they used to meet downtown, and I didn't know much about them. And then my sister sent me the– The application. The magazine. Oh, I see. It happened that the magazine she sent me told me about them building this and meeting out here. The Scandinavian Club. Yes. And that was after my husband died. And so I thought, well, I just– Well, then I belong to Adcel, which is– I don't know if you know about that or not. It was a club that– It was a businessman's club, really. And when it started out– I'll make that short. Anyway, they– I sat next to a woman sometimes. We sat where we could. And often I sat with her, and we talked about the– About Vasa. About Vasa. And she told me about Vasa and everything, and she got me interested. And then they were so close to me over there, you see, why– So I start– Well, and I had a friend who could introduce me. I mean, about four men. And how many years have you belonged then after your husband died? I think it's been about five or six years. So that's that long then since your husband died? It's been 20 years since he died. He died in 67, just before he was 68. So you had to take care of yourself then for seven years. But I've been in good health up until three years ago. I just managed– I did all my snow shoveling. I did my mowing, and I did everything. And you still drive the car, and you– Oh, yes. Go to the shopping centers and everything. You don't have to rely on anybody. Not in the daytime. How about the same age group now as you are? Are they as peppy as you are? Well– Nobody's building any houses. I'm sure about that. No, that's gonna be– You and me, the talk of Omaha. Well, either South is gonna be, I think. Because of all the problems. But– I have another friend of mine who's 90. She's 93, and she drives. Is she Swedish? No. But– So your friends now, they are not particularly of a Swedish background because of your husband. Of course, you met many other people that– No, they're– They're movie clubs. And– Well, church. Were you also interested in photography? Oh, yes. Did you help your husband then to– Well, you know, they said that every photographer had to have a wife to carry all the equipment. You were the tripod carrier, huh? Yeah. And, yes, we belonged to the Cinema 16, which had practically professional quality. You really– And you had to have a Cinema 16 camera. And then we belonged to Omaha Movie Club and Slide Club. And they wanted quality, but– Not quite. What have you done now with all those black-and-white pictures? Oh, I've got them. And when I built my house, the cabinet down below has spaces and places for them. And the– The 16 projector is so heavy, you know, that my husband fixed it, so all he had to do was just roll it out like this, you see. And over there, they fixed it so I can just pull it out, and we can have pictures. So then you can go back to your memories. Yes, and when the family were here, we had lots of– The downstairs was–