 This is tape number three, it's the continuation of the interview with Ange Bengtsson, Genesee, Illinois, and today it's the 11th of June, 1986, cassette three, side one. This is tape number four, it's the continuation of the interview with Ange Bengtsson, Genesee, Illinois, and today it's the 11th of June, 1986, cassette three, side one. This is tape number four, it's the continuation of the interview with Ange Bengtsson, Genesee, Illinois, and today it's the 11th of June, 1986, cassette three, side one. I left my homeland Sweden and arrived in America the year of 1927, February 23rd. Why would a young man do a thing like that? If I worked for someone, all I could earn was about 50 cents a day. Of three boys, we were not all needed at home. I can't explain what America fever is like, but something like it was on the loose in our neighborhood, and I caught it. And it seemed to me that the only cure for this was to cross over to the other side, and then all would be well. Today, 51 years later, as I look back, how could I leave my mother, Inge, and my father, Carl, sisters Agnes and Ellen and Ingeborg, and my two brothers, Anders and Fritz, and go away just like that? Of course, I promised to be home in five years, but it turned out to be 12 before I saw my family again. The first time I saw the Statue of Liberty was a cold February morning. After the boat docked, it was hours before we got to go off. And we were met by a Swedish-speaking pastor. I had to prepare a railroad ticket to Detroit, Michigan, and somehow I found a Pennsylvania railroad station and boarded a train for Detroit. It took us through Canada, and we had a three-hour layover in Buffalo. I was hungry, so I went to a bakery and bought 50 cents worth of doughnuts, and I got a big sack of doughnuts. So I guess I overate and do that. Ten cents was all I should have spent, but I didn't know any better. It was a crisp February morning when I first saw the big city of Detroit. By taxi, I got to a family I knew, and that same morning I ate cornflakes for the first time in my life. After three weeks, a friend helped me to find work. Fifty cents an hour was the going price for unskilled labor. But on the third day I got fired. I don't know just why. It was hard not to understand what one was told. But I found work elsewhere by myself, the same 50 cents an hour. Carpenters were getting $1 an hour, and union bricklayers $1.57 an hour that same year. Room and board usually cost around $10 a week, and sometimes we tried to do our own cooking, but we probably got by just a dollar or two cheaper, but not anything you would spark about. Lindbergh made it to Paris. Out those big black headlines flung out. One nice spring morning, people that couldn't tried to talk sweet to me. Time moved along, and I spent five years in Detroit. The second was my best, and the last was the worst, when September 9, 29, the big depression came, suddenly, and it's a very unpleasant surprise to all of us. How nice it was to get a letter from home. And I wrote home often, too, but we were several boys from my home neighborhood, and all knew each other. So we often got together and talked old times. Then there was not much, too much homesickness. We would tell stories from our school days and talk about our work and sometimes drink coffee together on Sunday mornings. Five years went by, and one day, February 19, 32, I decided to take a bus out to Yenisei, Illinois. Maybe I could find something to do there on some farm. I know a young man, Yenisei, David Johnson. He had worked on a farm for a year, and he wanted to move. Maybe I could get the job where he left off. So this is how I came to live with and work for Willard P. Anderson seven whole years. During this time, I often had in my mind to go back to the city. But then I met a girl, Ruth Peterson, and my plans got severely altered, for which I always have been happy. Today, this is 40 years. Two sons and seven grandchildren later. Ruth and I celebrated our 40th wedding anniversary last Sunday, March 4, 1979. It was a most pleasant and wonderful day. Saturday night dinner at the plantation together with our sons' families was an evening we will never forget. Open house and church on the following Sunday afternoon, so many friends came to shake hands with us, 200 or more, a number of presents and so many gifts. You got fired in Detroit. What really happened? You just got fired. I know you got fired, but do you find out the reason why? No. No, there's no reason. You didn't understand the language? Well, yes, enough to work, but if you remember, I've ever seen Detroit. That is the building, the 40-story building, Penobscot building in Detroit. And it was on that very building in the bottom I did my very first work in America, and it was there I was. They tore down the four-story brick building and tear this down and clean it up. That's when I came in, and there'd be black men and Negroes in there working, and I didn't understand what they told me, frankly. I think maybe he saw me too green possibly to work in there, dangerous or something, I don't know. But all they do, they don't ask you to do anything wrong. They just give you a white slip, that's the end of it. You get that white slip, you go three hours and get your check and go home. I knew that, so that's what happened there. How did you know that? Well, yes, I was told that by other guys that if it ever happened, you get your money. You don't stick it on anymore after you stick it on? No, you don't. No, you don't. That's just how they work it over there. Now it isn't that way, but then they could fire anyone on the spot. I'm telling you, the fired boys, there was a contractor that built houses, and he had Swedish boys working for him. They wheeled mortar and they wheeled brick. They were sick to death, you know, working so hard for this guy to please him. If you didn't work that hard, you'd get fired. It was a poor system. It was a hard system to come into. Did you work for any Swedish foremen or Swedish contractors? There was one, yes, they were no different. They had to push the help. There was one name, there was one plastic contractor I could have worked for, Eklund. But his name was Eklund. I should have worked there. He was a wonderful man, but I never got started. There were some good ones, but they had one cost, and he was wild. He built houses, but he drank so terribly, he'd be drunk all the time, and hollered at his men. Help was cheap. You could get new men any time. There was somebody waiting to go on. So we needed some change in the labor market in that direction, which we did. It came about later on, of course. But I learned, then I was being hired. A manhorn is a hard worker, usually, so I was a hard worker. So after that, whenever I got on the job, I always worked hard. People didn't like me. I worked harder than some of the laborers. I usually got to stay to the last man after that, because I worked hard. The last man, the last job I had up there, I stayed on the big waterworks in Dearborn. I stayed to the very last man on the job, among probably 30 laborers. That talked good for me, too. I worked and did what I should. How did your co-workers like that, if you worked too hard? Didn't they tell you to slow down? They didn't like it. They didn't like it. I was told that we were in a basement one time, where they put a new floor in the building, and they put these cinders on the bottom of the clay, and steel on the clay, and then cement floor on that. The very bottom of the basement, there'd be clay under there, and then cinders. And then we had to pack the cinders, they didn't tamp it like that. Sometimes, oh, we'd tamp this hard before we poured the cement. And some of these guys, I always told them to hold the tamper, and the barge was round, and lift it up, otherwise the hand-tissue went down. Round and round. Some truth to that. Oh, lazy. Why they were so lazy. They said, you don't have to work when you get 50 cents an hour. You don't have to work. That's no good. I didn't look at it that way. I looked at you had to work. And so I think I've been happy in my way of doing things. I got along good with my bosses, except that very first time, I didn't have a chance to get acquainted even or nothing. That boss was pushed hard, too, don't you forget it, with his boss. And then they liked to fire a guy to scare the rest of them those days. You know, scare the rest of them. Look out. That happened, too. So they hired and fired all day? They sure did. They sure did, not all the time, but always they changed every day. That was a big job. But maybe the saying was true then, that some workers were not worth the money they were paid. Well, they— And the average, you think they were good workers? No, they were eye workers. They'd work hard when they had to, most of them, that kind of labor. And they were—skip as much as you can. I'd say that's all I can say, most of them. But then all—not everyone, of course, were that way. But that was a big job. For some reason, I happened to come in on that very bottom building of that Penobscot building, 48-story building. We'd been up on top of it since, haven't we, at once. And that was my first job in Detroit. And I—Why wasn't I more scared then? I don't know why I was scared. I found a job. I worked for a plumber later after that. And it was easier. There wasn't so many men around, and I got to dig ditches by hand and so on. And I did well with them. They never— They gave me work to do, and I did it. And I got along very good. And then as you learn the language more, you have less trouble, you know. Were the people helpful, like the Swedes you came together with? Yeah, I'd say they were, yeah. I'd say they were people we knew, that I knew. Yeah, I think they were— Yeah, we got along good together with people. And then you rented a room together with somebody else? Yeah, mostly with somebody else. I lived with one guy how long? One guy most of the time. His name was Eric Anderson. He was from West Jutland, too. I lived with him and slept with him a big part of five years, almost. And then he died of TB. The very idea, I could have got TB from that guy. I never— How lucky I escaped that. He died— got sick and died of TB. His lungs got shot. And I often thought of that. I was with him so much, and I could have caught that guy. How lucky I was to escape that. Five years, that was a long time, too. Yeah, that's what happened. So those rooms now you rented, did you do the— No, no, no. Somebody would come in there every day and made the beds. Not always. Sometimes we— One time we had an apartment twice, and then we'd only come in once a week and do a little extra work. But we were supposed to keep clean ourselves. We had these Murphy beds that you put up on the wall. It was a mess. You never had to make your bed. You just clamped that thing on the pillars, and up the wall, that bed was made. The room was empty right there. That was wonderful. You just escaped. Oh, that was a messy thing. Shut the door. You didn't know where the bed was. Pulled down your bed. Murphy beds. I'd never heard of them since. I didn't like to look at them, either. They— Well, they had them in apartments. I didn't know any of them in Chicago. So there were a lot of new gimmicks you had to learn when you came to the United States. Yeah. You kept them in the car. No. Murphy beds. No. No. No. No. But I have told many times, or sometimes, anyway, about the first trip when Roger was with me to Sweden. And we forgot all about Sweden. And you come in the hotel in Guttenberg there, and my niece was with me. And I gabbled away this and this, all excited about my trip, you know. I heard him say to my niece, Can't you speak any Swede? Of course I could, but I mixed it up. And all excited, too. And— I was going to say about— The bed. Huh? About what? About the bed. Yeah, about the bed. Yeah, we had two beds in our room. We got—my nephew and niece got us this room in the hotel, kind of a— It was more of a room in your private house. No, it was a hotel that time. By gosh, it was. And there was one bed, like our bed, sort of. And Roger says, I'll take that bed. My boy says, I want that bed. The other one was a sofa to open up, and there was a sleeping, too, if you had to. I was to sleep in that bed. You know, that thing was pulled out, and I laid down in there, and I didn't feel good. I thought somebody would shut the lid and bury me after this. It was like a coffin to me. I didn't feel good in that box. I couldn't stand that. And then the shorts beds they had there, short beds. In Sweden, they'd be shorter beds, usually. And I do love the American beds. Well, they're longer now. Yeah. And it— Isn't that strange, though? Because the Swedish people are supposed to be tall. Yeah. I don't know, years ago— They have short beds. Why did they do much shorter beds? Years ago, it was worse that, you know, shorter beds. And then they were sitting in sleeping bags. We had a guy in the— run a steen cross, you know what a steen cross is? And for the road, cross-track. And in our home, before I left, that summer, I believe, before I left, he slept in one of our rooms there in Humberid. He was so tall. He said, I have to have my knees doubled. Poor guy. Couldn't sleep good, that way. He didn't make any excuse for that. That's what men were supposed to be. So now, when you think back on Detroit and the first years, working with other people and for other people, you came to Geneseo. Was it much easier here than to live? They tell you, you didn't have any worry about any foreign man, so— It's all a different life altogether. Different life altogether. I could work on that farm quite a while. You got very well acquainted. They treated me very nice. I'd be invited to Sunday dinners in places like they were, if I wanted to go. Very nice to me. But it was kind of a band of hard work, really, and not financially getting any place. It was—they were hanging over you all the time, which on the Farmer II at that time, they didn't make your head way at all. Ruth can tell you here, it was the same way. You didn't get any place financially there for a while. It was extensive. So— So in Detroit, after a day's work, you were free? Yeah. You could go anywhere you wanted? You cleaned up and went to supper in the boarding house, all the rest up, you know, cleaned up. And you never wear overalls, have overalls on at job, where you worked, you go to clean clothes on the streetcars. It's a different life altogether. It didn't take me far, though. It ended. But that's— I recall one of the first years I was out here, and we went to help. The neighbors saw wood up here, by 8th Mile, we call, the Andersons, my boss's dad, and they sawed wood up there, and we hauled wood clear from up there and home, for that matter. And we were dinner, for dinner in that house, they brought dinner for the whole gang that sawed wood. And their own son-in-law, Harry, was with us. And we went in to dinner, to eat dinner, with our overalls on, and that bothered me. You never did anything like that in Detroit. You go into the boarding house with overalls on and eat your dinner, you was cleaned up. That was the beauty of it a lot of times. Everybody liked the city. That's true. Here, he— You had to step down when you came to Geneseo. Yeah. You want to see your boy, see the Snickers. She can tell me that now, that I don't dress enough for meals. Come in with overalls to eat, and sometimes dirty. The other day I was out in the field and cultivated corn, and Greg here, the son-in-law, he laughed at me, and I thought, why are you laughing so much? I was so black in the face. And I came in the house, Ruth said, why are your teeth shining today? Feet were black, and I look in the mirror, and my teeth shine out like a sun. So that is sometimes— She's pretty patient. There's times when I should behave better by the table. Then sometimes I help out in the house a little bit to clean up my mess. Do you think about coming to Detroit? Yeah. When you're back? No, I wouldn't want to go back from the country for the bit. Never wanted to.