 into Kansas. All right, that's what I wanted you to tell Leonard about. And I've got those. I have his kind of a diagram. Well, it's copies of letters that he wrote about his experiences out there. And I could go up and get that if you went with me to Elgin, I mean to Wausau. And he accepted it, but they didn't have a place for him to live. So in the meantime, for a few months, and my mother was pregnant at the time, for a few months, he went out to Kansas and did home mission work driving across the prairies. That's what he did until they got the parsnips ready in Wausau so that they could move in. And then my brother was born right then too, very soon. November 4, 1986, and I'm sitting together with Ebba Victoria Theodora Campbell. She was born 1894, 17th of July, in Wausau, Nebraska. And this is 14 November, 1986. Your father, now, he left Elgin and went out to Western Kansas. Yes. And so what happened then to your mother? Well, she stayed with her mother in Sweetsburg, Iowa until it was time to move to Wausau, because then the parsnips was built. They built a parsnips there for them. And then when he got through with these trips in Kansas, he came to Wausau and went and got her and brought her there, and they moved into that parsnips. And he was out there on this frontier for about four months. Several months. Did he tell you anything about that when you got older? And what he did there? Well, what I had is mostly those letters that he wrote in those books there. He tells his experiences out there. And he told it to people in Elgin? Well, no. He writes to the secretary there, he says. What? He writes? Well, you see, you have that picture of that class that he says is his favorite class. They had a secretary, and they had officers. And so he wrote that letter to her. I don't know which one it would be. It doesn't say, but the. Yeah. So he wrote, that was just when he arrived. It was a big class, and they were all the, are they confirmed, you think? Oh, yes. Yes, it was a senior class. Senior class, then? Yeah. They were all confirmed. And only ladies, no girls? Yes. Only girls. No boys in that class. No. Evidently not, because he writes that it was the best class he ever had down there. Oh, I was a lost class. And you know. And they had it organized so that they had the head of the class and the secretary and so on. It was parliamentary rules. So you are the third in order from the. Yes. Yes. Evodora is your older sister. Evodora? Evodia. Evodia. Excuse me. Where does the name come from, Evodia? It's an unusual name. Well, Evodia from Monteryog, you know, in the, was it Paul's letters somewhere? Biblical. Uh-huh. See, it's a biblical name. Uh-huh. Ah. I see. Evodia from Monteryog or something. And then your brother Moritz. Moritz. Your second. Evodia was Anna Evodia Rossinia. And Moritz's name was Johannes Moritz Ferdinand. And I was Emma Victoria Theodora. Theodora. And the next one was Karl Adolf Bernadotte. Bernadotte. Bernadotte. And then the next one was Luther Ernest Immanuel. And the youngest one, no, Luther Ernest Constantius. And Herman was Gustav Herman Immanuel. My children used to love to have me tell them all these names. Do you remember the time in Warsaw, Nebraska? Oh, I was 12. Because you were 12 years old. 12 years old when we left there. You went to school there and the. Yes. Oh, I was in the 8th grade. Yes, when we went to Duluth. And there were a lot of Swedes. Yes. Did you talk Swedish then even outside of home? Oh, sure. Oh, yeah. We were, we had a rule that we had to speak Swedish. We had a rule that we had to speak Swedish at the table because we were not going to forget Swedish. How about table prayers now? Did your dad say the table prayers before you started to eat? Did he what? The table prayer. It was Swedish, of course. Oh, yes. Did you, did you say it at any time? Do you remember the old table prayer? What did you say before you ate? The grace. Yes. In Jesus' name, we go to the table to eat, drink and pray. May God teach us to do so that we may have the grace. Amen. Did you take turn and then on the table? No, we all said it together. Together. Uh-huh. And then after the meal you said, thank you. Thank you. Thank you. All in Swedish. Yeah. And we start to tell something in English and my father says, Svenska. We're all sitting around and eating at the same time. There was no running around. And how they ever got six kids to the table for breakfast is beyond me. All dressed, ready for school. Just think. And for devotions before we went to school. Well, you had devotions before? Six kids. Oh, yeah. Sure. How long was that, about 10 minutes or? Oh, yeah. It wasn't too long. But didn't you have the school of devotions? You didn't have devotions in school? No. Nothing at all? No. You went to public school? Public school. And there was no religion? No. No. And my father didn't believe in religion in the school. He didn't. He thought religion should be in the home and in the church. So he was? Because he wrote something. There's something he wrote about that. Oh, is that right? You have an article that he has written about it? Yeah, I've seen it. Now I can't put my hands right on it, but he wrote about it, that he thought the place for religion was in the home and in the school. Yeah. At the church then, of course. Yeah, the church was responsible more. So you went to church and of course to Sunday school? Oh, yes. Luther League? Oh, yeah. Young people? Oh, yeah. But you were too young to? Oh, excuse me. You were too young not to enter the C-Circum, the Luther League? No. No. Oh, this is the Luther League. And then they had the Tabor Oratorio Chorus. He started that one? Yes. Of course, we had, you know, they really had. Was he musically inclined and was playing the organ? Oh, my mother was an organist. But you see, he got all the people that were interested in music together. And this is a band. And my brother here played the cornet. And they had a band. And then they had, I don't know if I can find all these things that they had. They had an academy where they taught immigrants English. I see. This was an active church. Oh, so they were, so a lot of immigrants came up during that time. Oh, lots of them. Early 1900s. Yes. Sure. So was he the teacher, then, your father or your mother? What? Were they both teaching, then, your mother and your father? They got this Joshua Oden. Oh, he was a student. No, he was a teacher. He was the principal of the high school. And they had him to lead this group. To teach the immigrants. When he was there, teaching them English, this oratorio. But I was going to say there's all kinds of instruments. Oh, yeah, I hear it. This was an orchestra. Yes. They even had an orchestra, you see. Here's the orchestra. And they had a band. And they had, let's see. Where did they perform, then, this orchestra? In the church? Church. In the church. Yeah. Oh, yeah. You know, they thought they were somebody. Well, they were. They were doing as good as they could. They bought the instruments, then. Oh, there were many musical people in the church. Oh, here. This is the town. Of Vasa. Vasa. From the church people. Oh. So you see, they really had an eye. They were active. They were active. And they really thought a lot of themselves. I mean, they had a lot of get up and go. So what happened with the young people when they got old enough to start work? Did they move away, or did they stay in the community? Well. Were they able to find a job there to support themselves? Oh, a lot of them did. But a lot of them were farmers, though. Yeah, yes, the boys. But they went away to school. My father pushed. He really tried to get them. Whenever he saw somebody that had some talent or something, he would get them to go away to school. He was after students all the time, both for Wahoo and for Rock Island. So he was on the lookout for students that had some talent. So did they go down to Wahoo then? Many of them went to Wahoo. And then that was only Academy then. And then if they were going to go on, they went to Rock Island. Many from Rock Island went to Rock Island. Yeah. So then he left Warsaw and came up to Duluth. Yeah, after he'd been in Warsaw 15 years. So you say 15 years? 15 years, and then we moved to Duluth. And then my mother died when we had just been there six months, seven, in the spring. And we went in the fall of 1906. So your mother, she wrote a letter to her mother. Yeah. It was very interesting. Yeah. She says that, Ja, nu har jag dröjt så länge att jag får riktigt lov att skämma sig min stora försymplighet. Yeah. And that was her last letter to her mother. Yeah, and then following just about a week later, when she went to the hospital and died. And that letter was written to Iowa then. What? They lived in central Iowa, or where did they live? In Sweetsburg? My grandmother did. She lived in Sweetsburg? Yes. So she died there. Yeah. No. No? Oh, my grandmother. Ja. Your mother's mother. My mother's mother died in Sweetsburg. In Sweetsburg. And that's her last letter to her. This is my mother's last letter to her mother. And then she couldn't part with this. So she copied this by hand. My grandmother did. I told about that. It tells about in one letter that she couldn't part with my mother's last letter to her. So she copied it herself. This is a copy. So this is your grandmother's writing? My grandmother's writing. It was good handwriting. Very good. She was an old lady then. Oh, yes. Yeah. Yes, she was. She was old. And she was, well, there are letters there that she wrote then to my father that are, well, she was really a very, had a good mind. So you remember her well then? Oh, I spent a whole summer with her. Down in Sweetsburg? In Sweetsburg. She talked only Swedish, though. What? Did she talk Swedish? Yes. No English? Well, she understood some, you know, but she didn't talk it. No. And she came from Malmö. Malmö, Skåne, ja. And there are letters here that my grandfather, my grandpa Munson, wrote back there. Did you see those? Yes, I saw some of them. That he wrote, that my grandfather wrote to Sweden? No, I don't think I saw those. Oh, yeah, there, you can read. So your grandpa, now, here in Sweetsburg, he had a big farm there. Yeah, he had a pretty good farm. 15 horses. And he says, if I could, I would like to sell you a horse so you could drive your parents to church or wherever they wish to go. So they were pretty well off then on your mother's side. In Sweetsburg, yeah. In Sweetsburg. Yeah. And there was good land there on there. They weren't poor. But he talks about tornadoes and the temperature going up to over 100 degrees. Yeah. So you stayed one summer with them then? Yes. Well, then my grandfather died when I was five. So did you have any? But I stayed with my grandmother a whole summer when my father went to Sweden. My father went to Sweden for that summer for his health. He was in poor health. Oh, your father? Yeah, he was in very poor health. Was he? He had polio when he was a child in Sweden. And his whole right side was paralyzed. His right arm was paralyzed. How could he write then? With his left hand. Oh, he wrote with his left hand. He learned to write very well with it. Oh, my, yes. I see. Yeah. So this is very interesting, I think. Tells about the weather and all that. Very, very detailed. John Monson was his name. Yeah. Did you have any uncles or brothers to you? No. No. So who took over the farm then when your grandfather died? No, they didn't have the farm then. He was retired by that time. He sold out then. Yeah. And he was living. They were living near town. Mm-hmm. Right in Sweden. And see, we brought that book down that tells, yeah. It tells about him in this book. I Korsbaneret. Korsbaneret. Mm-hmm. My father wrote that about his. But I think this is very interesting if you want to read. 1902. Yeah. How about did your dad have a car in the Warsaw? Yes. He had a car. He had a car to Warsaw. A car. Well, you see, he loved Elgin. Well, he did. And he loved the people there. But he always had wanted to be a missionary. And he thought this was, well, he just loved it too much. And he thought everything was so easy for him there. And the people loved him. And he loved them. And he wanted more hardship. So that's why he went out to Warsaw. Yeah, and also the Kansas mission. Kansas first, while he was waiting for a place to live in Warsaw. How did he travel to out in Kansas? Did he, how did he travel? By horse or? Yeah, by horse. He had his own horse then? Well, no. I don't know how he got the horses, but he drove by team. By team. Mm-hmm. Did you see that there's a letter there, or is that that tells about Hudson had invited them to come to their place? And how was that? No, I started to tell something. There was a, in his book, he wrote about Hudson. Yeah, then he took, it tells about his trip to Kansas then, after he left Swedesburg and went to Kansas. And it tells quite a bit about that trip, how he stayed at Lindsberg. He stayed with Dr. Carl Swenson. Swenson, yeah. And when we were in Warsaw, he invited Dr. Swenson to come to Warsaw and speak to our church there. So you saw Carl Swenson then? Oh, yes. I have a picture of him up here. He was a big man, wasn't he? I have pictures of him. If I had thought about it. No, that's all right. I know what he looks like. Uh-huh. I know what he looks like. Yeah, there's a picture there of him, a very big man, with a big overcoat on. And I have it up here. So how did he talk then? Did he talk Swedish to you, for instance? Or did you talk to him? Did you, Carl Swenson? Oh, yes. He spoke English. He was president of the college, Bethany. He was a good speaker. Oh, very good. Yeah, I remember when they went to meet him at the train, you know, with the horses and the carriage, he couldn't get into the back seat because the front seat was more open, you see. He was so big that he had to sit in the front seat. He had to sit beside the driver. But he was supposed to sit in the back. Yeah, because he was a guest. Oh, yeah. But he couldn't get in there. He got in the front seat. So he was really a big man then. Oh, very big, very big. I have pictures of him upstairs. Yeah, and he was not very old when he died. No. He was a young man. I guess he wasn't too old. I don't know just how old he was. So you remember the years then in Warsaw as interesting years. Oh, yes. You got many friends there. Oh, yes. So how did you take this moving to Duluth now? What? Did you like that to go with your parents to Duluth? To Duluth? Yeah. Well, it was an experience, you know. How did you go there? You go by train? Train, by train. But we had an auction, and they sold all the lovely things they had from Elgin. They couldn't take that with them up there? No, because it was too expensive to ship all the way from Warsaw to Duluth. And so they had an auction, and auctioned off all these good things that my mother had from Elgin. And so that was too bad. So you had to part with it. I always felt bad about that. Because her dishes, she had everyday dishes that now are so expensive, that copper tea leaf, you know. And that was our everyday dishes, copper tea leaf pattern, English. And then for our good dishes, we had also very, very nice dishes. And they were all sold, and everything was sold, really. So they had to buy new things? Our organ was sold. I think our piano was sold, too. Or did we get the piano? So you had to buy new things then when you came to Duluth? Used things from secondhand stores. Not so good. Not as nice as what we had in Warsaw. So all your children, all your children went with them? Oh, yeah. Sure. Except my sister, Vody, was a senior at Wahoo. So she stayed down there. Yeah. So and then you had to start a new school? Yeah. How did that work out? City school. City school. A big city school. And I got along real well. You did? So we must have had pretty good education in Warsaw. And you found new friends? Yeah, sure. So after a while, you started to feel at home in Duluth? What? After a while, you started to feel at home in Duluth, too? Oh, yes. We had really good time, because my father was very progressive. He wanted us to do everything. He wanted us to skate and ski and go sliding and do everything, all the sports that they had. He had a great big bobsled made for us, big long bobsled, that we could go up to the way up to the boulevard and come down through Lincoln Park, around the curves, and this long bobsled. He really wanted us to take advantage of all the sports. So you joined other kids in town, too, then? What? You joined other kids in town, too, then? Oh, yeah, sure. For playing and games? Yes, yes. And then you had to learn to skate up there? To skate? Did you learn to skate? Yes, yes. And ski. Ski, too? Oh, yeah, sure. And how about the church now? You were active then? Oh, yes. Luther League? Yes. And I was only 12 when I was playing for the prayer meeting, playing the organ. Yes, because our organist didn't want to come to midweek service. And he got me to play for the midweek services. Oh, you always had midweek services? You had midweek services? Yes, prayer meeting. At night, then? Yes. Yeah. And how long did you stay in Duluth, then? Well, you see, I wasn't there very long. How was that? No, I went two years to Duluth Central High School. And then my father got the notion that he wanted me in a Christian school. So he sent me to Gustavus, to the academy. So I finished academy in one year, then. And then went to college, and four years. So I was at Gustavus five years. At the college, then? One year in academy, and four years in college. So the academy, they was to prepare you for college? Yes. You see, I'd only had two years of high school in Duluth. Oh, I see. Why did you take only two years? Did you have to start to work, or? No, but my father wanted me in a Christian school. He was afraid I would want to dance and do things that all the kids were doing up there. What they were doing, then? At Central High School. And of course, I was doing very good work. I mean, I was getting good grades, and I was taking German, and oh, I really had a really good start. Better than at Gustavus. Oh, I see. I thought. And at Gustavus, instead of being a Christian college, I was having a lot of fun. At Gustavus. But you didn't tell your father at all. No. So he didn't know that. What? Your father didn't expect that. Well, no, he didn't really, but. But there was supposed to be a religious college, though. How could I get along with that? Well, everything you do, you have to break rules to have fun. You think so? Yeah. You think the old people are too strict? Ha, ha, ha. So we broke the rules. So you started to dance then. And so, yeah. And you see, one evening, you see, our dormitory, I was in dormitory, the doors were closed at 730 every night. And then we had to be studying. Well, from suppertime to 730, boys used to come in. And we'd go into the living room. And then somebody would play a little waltz or something, and we'd dance around a little bit. And so, one evening, we were doing that. And one of these girls that is kind of a goody-goody, we called them goody-goodies if they wouldn't do these things. And so she reported us. Oh, she squealed. We were reported that we were dancing in the living room. So she squealed on you. What? She squealed on you. Yeah, yeah. And so, what do you think? We were campused for 30 days. You couldn't leave the campus? We couldn't do a thing. They were having all kinds of things going on. We couldn't go to anything. And all the refreshments and everything, you know. But the boys used to try to take a ladder and get some up to us through the window. And what happened all then? Did they tell your father home in Duluth what happened? Oh, no, no. You didn't dare tell him either? No, no. You had a good time, you said. Oh, I think he found out about it. But there was a lesson, you remember, 30 days. Yeah. So what happened then after the 30 days? Did you start to dance again? Well, after 30 days, well, we had fun. We were the idols of the school. We wore badges 30 days. And everybody made a big fuss about us and saw to it that we got all the refreshments and everything. So you were rebels then? What? You were rebels then? Yeah. Oh, dear. How did you learn to dance now? What? How did you learn to dance? We didn't really. We just did what we, we didn't really know how. But we just, somebody played a waltz, and so we danced. Kept time to the waltz and played around a little bit. What kind of boys? But the boys didn't get any punishment, just the girls. Why? Why? Because it was sin for us, but not for the boys. So they came off easy. They came off easy. And now they have school dances. Yeah. And even the faculty will be, you know, their patrons of the dances and so on. So you can really feel proud you started a tradition that's still going? What? You can be proud that you started a tradition that's still going? Yeah. Oh, dear. But you had to take punishment, 30 days. Oh, yeah, 30 days. So we wore these badges 30 days, you know, and everybody. Yeah, but how about your parents now? Did they find out about it? Oh, I don't know. You were not scolded by your father? I don't remember that, no. They weren't notified or anything. They were not notified. You were kind of scared, or I mean, what happened to the whole boyhood? Oh, yeah. And also, another thing was that I was invited to the Olympics. They had a banquet, and the Olympians, that was a men's fraternity. And I was invited to that. And all the girls there had names of goddesses, and the men were all gods, gods and goddesses. And of course, this was great stuff. I really had a good time, you know, thought this was something. And so I wrote home all about it and told her about it. And then I got a bad case of measles. So I had to be quarantined. And my father wrote and said that that was a punishment for this heathen thing that we had done. That was heathen. Oh, I see. So what do you think about that? Do you think much about it? Oh, I always thought it was a big joke. Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, I really thought it was a good joke. How about the boys on the campus? No. You dated boys on the campus? Oh, yeah. You were out walking around? Oh, sure. Kissing in the alleys under the trees and everything? No, no, no. You didn't do that? No, no, I was very. Yeah. This is Saitou, the combination with I said I had one funny experience. Northfield, Minnesota. Saitou, you had an experience. Yeah. You said you were in the. That must have been my freshman or sophomore year, freshman. I could find out. But you know, the, what do you call him, Dr. Carlton was the, he had charge of the, you know, what do you call him? He was the English teacher, you see. He had English at Carlton, at Gustavus. But he was the, the word I want. You see, you had to report to him and pay him the dues and all that. He was the comptroller or the financial man? Yeah, yeah. So he called me in. And he said I hadn't paid my tuition. And I knew I had because my father had sent me a check. And I had taken it in. And it had been certified and everything. And so I knew I had, but he claimed I hadn't. So I wrote immediately to my father and told him about it. And I asked him if he had the canceled check. And he sent it immediately back to me. And it had Dr. Carlton's signature on the back and everything. But you see, I was too, I thought, well, my father knows, God knows, I know, and I don't care about Dr. Carlton. And I never took it in there. And all these years, I have had that check. I've had that check, I still have it, with his name and everything. And isn't that funny? But I never got a single, all my report cards, they didn't give me any grades. Why? Well, I was supposed to not have paid my tuition. You didn't get any grades? I didn't get my grades. So what did your father say then? Well, I don't know. He didn't show the report card to him? No, no. And you know, it was just a little while ago now that I threw that report card away. I thought, well, I don't want my kids to see that, you know, with no grades there. But then when I was a senior, they asked me to teach the whole freshman class that came in. At Gustavus? At Gustavus. The whole senior class came without higher algebra, and I was a math major. And they asked me to teach that whole class of freshmen the higher algebra. And I did that for a whole semester. And you had no report card? No report card. It was clean. Did you meet up with Dr. Colton later on that he asked you about it? Never said a word, but he picked on me. A strange story. He picked on me. And I always said, you know, I had him for four years in English. I had to go to his classes every year. And sometimes he'd pick on me and say, Miss Olson, give an account of the lesson, right after we had— Why did he pick you? Because he had it in for me. He always had— You must have done something to him. No. Maybe you refused a date, perhaps. No, but— He was too old. I don't know. What in the world? How much older was he than you? What? How much older was he? Oh, he—see, he got married and had several children. And his wife used to come up to sewing class when I was taking home ec. Oh, I see. Yeah. But I have friends from there that they think this is the funniest thing they ever heard of. And I still have that check. Oh. There are experiences. Yeah, but I think it was my—I just thought, shoot, I don't care about him. My father knows. God knows. I know. That was the kind of reasoning I had. You were— Very childly. You stuck to it. And I stuck to it. But that was, as I call it, immature. But when you received your report card cleaned, or didn't you question yourself? No, not a bit. You gone through a whole semester without any— No, no, no, not a bit. No. I had grades for the first year, and then after that, no more grades. You mean for three years? And then when I— For three years. Yeah, but how did you graduate then? I graduated with—and they—and I had a chance to teach and be principal of a school, and they gave me a recommendation. So, but didn't you have to show your report card, so for your— Evidently not. No, I guess not. I still had it. Oh, dear. And I used to say, well, I love English, but not on account of Dr. Calton, but not because of him, but because I love English. This Dr. Calton, oh, he was no Swedish. Not—no, he was what you call an Anglo feel. Anglo—what is that? He was crazy about English. Oh, I see. Crazy about anything that was English, but not American. He didn't care for American literature. We didn't get American literature or anything like that. We just had to stick to it. Was he a British native then, or was he British native? I don't know. He was just what I call kind of stuck on English. I see. Was he a good teacher? He thought he was. No, I never—I never liked him a bit. So you went through there for four years. Yeah. And you paid the tuition. Oh, sure. Sure. So what happened then after you graduated from Gustavus? Well, then I got this job teaching. I was principal of a high school. Where? Down in Wyckoff, Minnesota. Wyckoff? Wyckoff. Wyckoff. Minnesota. Well, this is in the southern part. Is it in the southern part? Yeah. And for how long? I just stayed there one year. One year. And then I went up to Cloquet and taught up there. Close to Lulut. Yes. And you were close home. You could almost go home every week. Yes. No. No, by that time, my folks had—my father had moved— had married again and moved down to Nebraska. Oh, I see. Yeah. He took another church, then another parish, or— Yeah. Where in Nebraska? Yeah, he went to—now my mind is—one time somebody asked me where I was teaching that first year, and I couldn't remember the name of the town. Oh, that's easy to forget about things like that. And it's funny, though. Omaha, perhaps? What? Omaha? No. Oakland? No, it was down near—more south of Holdridge. Then he went to Holdridge afterwards. He went to Holdridge afterwards, after he had been there a few years. Yeah. Oh, there was a church in Exdell? Yes, yes. There was a church? Yes. I know Exdell very well. I spent one whole summer there. Exdell? Uh-huh. Teach—or taking care of handicapped people. Oh, I see. Yeah. I see. Yeah. What do you call it now, Exdell and—there's another place in between Holdridge and Exdell. What's the name of it? Exdell and Holdridge. Between Exdell and Holdridge? Yeah, there's a little place there. Freedom Lutheran Church in— Yeah. You know Freedom Lutheran Church? Oh, yeah. I can't remember the town, though, but it's in between there. Yeah. In Phelps County. Yes. So then you— Then I went to Washington, D.C., and I was in the examining division, examining papers, you know. How did you get that job? What? How did you get that job? Well, I just took the exam and I got a—right after I took the exam, you know, the civil service, I got a telegram saying, come at once and start in the examining division because evidently I— They wanted you to go to government then. Yes. Oh, I see. And I did quite a bit of translating when I was there, too, in Washington. I could translate Swedish bulletins, you know, like— I see. And this was during the First World War then? What? Was this during the First World War? During the First World War. You got a good job there then. Oh, yeah. Very good, and I enjoyed it. And you were not married then? No, no. But you met your husband out there. I met him there. So what did your father say then when you came home with a non-Swede? Well, of course, he had hoped— He had hoped I'd find a Swede. A Swedish father. At Gustavus, but I didn't. Do you think that was one of the reasons he sent you to Gustavus to find a good husband? No, no. It was because he was afraid I would dance in Duluth because, you know, I'd have more friends. Dancing with the Finns in Duluth. That was—yeah. But you didn't find any boy at Gustavus? No. Did you— No, no. No? No. I had lots of boyfriends. You had? Oh, yes. Lots of them. Good friends, but not to that extent. You had Emerald Johnson? I was only 20 years old. I wasn't 21 yet when I graduated from Gustavus. It was fast. Yeah. You did it in pretty good time. Yeah. But you were settled to do some work before you married, settled on to marry. Yes, several years. So you met your husband out in Washington. Yeah. How did you meet him? On a blind date? No. My brother—let's see. My brother came back from France and was going to stop and see me in Washington. And he had graduated from Lincoln—Nebraska University in Lincoln. And he had a friend there in Washington. And he said we'll look him up. And he has a car, and he'll take us home, you know, when we've been sightseeing and everything. So we did. And then he was rooming with this George that I married afterwards. So he was his roommate there in Washington. So that's how I got acquainted with him. Oh, and then you went out for dates. Through a friend of my brother's. And we were all good friends. What kind of work was he doing then? George, he was in the Department of Agriculture, and he traveled a lot. So you married then in Washington, D.C.? No, we married in Holdridge, Nebraska. So you went back then? Your father? Mm-hmm. So then you came into the English ancestry. He was of English background. Yes. He was English and Scotch. English and Scotch. Father Campbell and his mother, his grandmother, I mean his mother was English, and his father was Scotch. How did they work out now? I mean, here you come from a good old Swedish stock, and he from the... Well, he joined the Lutheran Church. He was a Presbyterian, but he joined the Lutheran Church. With Osdrukel. And we lived in Washington for five years. And we went to Luther's Circle, you know, that church in Washington, D.C., Luther Memorial. Oh, I see. Did he ask you to go to the Presbyterian Church? No, no, no. But you asked him to join you? Well, I don't know if I asked him, but he was... I mean, did he have a choice? Well, if he'd been stubborn about it, he could have. But he never was. Oh. And you had a happy reunion, I mean, a happy reunion for many, many years. Well, we were married in 1920, and he died three years ago. We were married over 60 years. 60 years. And he had this Alzheimer, you know, took him. And so for a while he was at the odd fellows here. And how many children did you have then? Four. Four. Four children. Two boys and two... First two girls and then two boys. So how long did you stay then in Washington? Just five years after we were married. And then we first went out to Seattle, and then we came back to Washington. Did you continue to work then? No, no. We had children. And he was in the agriculture department still? Yeah. And what year did you come back into Minnesota, like Northfield? Well, because in his agricultural work, he traveled a lot, and he came here to Northfield and found out there was a dairy that was for sale, and he thought that'd be a good place to live. And he bought that dairy, and we moved here. And we've lived here ever since. So he had a dairy business then? Yes, here in Northfield. Right here in Northfield? Yes. Oh, I see. Did you help out too when the kids got... No, no. I never worked except at home. So that was a good deal for you then, to come back to the old centenary. So he had that dairy business until he retired. Yeah, and he was a very good church man, and had many jobs in the church. And so we did well here. Were you active in the church too? Oh, yes. In the different societies? Yes, yes, both of us. Yeah. Singing in the choir, perhaps? No, no, I didn't sing in the choir. That was one thing. I wasn't a singer. So your dad, now, when he retired, what did he settle down in Nebraska? Who? Your dad. My dad? He died in 1943. He was... he came up to Minnesota again, and had a church over at Lafayette, near Gustavus. Near Bernadotte. Near St. Peter. Near Bernadotte. Yes, yeah, Bernadotte. And so he was there for a while, until he retired. And he didn't retire until he was really almost 80. No, it wasn't...