 We have December 15, 1986. I'm sitting together with Arthur Waldemar Anderson in Loves Park, Illinois. And he was born 1922 in Rockford. And your parents now, Mr. Anderson, they both came from Sweden. They both came from Sweden, yes. How much does your father know? My father was born 1896, and he was 16 years of age when he was sponsored by one of his uncles when he came direct from Teterholm to Rockford. And when he came to Rockford, why, he was given employment in a furniture factory. So he became a cabinetmaker and did very well at it to bring up his family. I have one brother, but my father then passed away 1951. But fortunately, he had the opportunity to go back and visit his mother back in Teterholm in 1950, which we've always been very thankful for. How big of a family was it that came from, your father? My father came from, there were four boys and three girls. And all four of the boys passed away before his mother passed away. It was very unfortunate that they all passed away at a rather young age. My dad was 55. Three of the girls were living in 1974 when I went to Teterholm for the first visit. And three months after I was there, one of my aunts passed away. But there are two that are still living in Teterholm. And we have been to visit with them four different times now. And one of the aunts has been here to Loves Park to visit us twice. So you are keeping in contact, then? I'm trying to keep contact. As I mentioned to you in a conversation we had, my wife and my cousin in Teterholm, and I have 95 relatives in total, and have visited with all of them. But my wife and one of my cousins have corresponded back and forth since 1974 every week. My wife writes in English, they usually do it on the weekend, and my cousin writes in Swedish. My cousin could not speak any English, but she now can read all the letters in English. And also my wife could not read or speak Swedish, can now read all the Swedish letters. And of course after 12 years and 52 letters a year, you learn to do those things. How did that come about? What got it started? Well, my aunt wrote me a letter right after my mother passed away in May of 1973. And her name was Ingeborg Engström, my father's sister. And I'd heard a great deal about her, I'd heard a great deal about Teterholm and about all the other relatives, but in all honesty it wasn't too meaningful until I finally got to visit that city. But what brought it about was my aunt wrote a letter to me and said, Förglimmit oss i Sverige, don't forget us in Sweden. That line was so meaningful to me that I immediately made contact with my brother and said, let's go to Sweden. So he and his wife and daughter and my wife and three sons, we wrote to Sweden and said we're coming over to visit. And so there were eight of us. The only problem I had in going to Sweden, we were only going to be gone two weeks the first time, I said now I won't have time to go from house to house to visit my relatives. I would like if all of my father's relatives could meet with us in a hotel where we stay in Teterholm, the Studehotellet, and we would have a party. It would be my party. And my cousins made those arrangements. So all the relatives I have on my father's side met with us and it was a very festive occasion, very heartwarming, a lot of tears and tears of happiness that we could all get together. I guess one of the most meaningful things was too when we did get over there, when we met with my dad's relatives for the first time, my three aunts all broke down and cried. They were happy to see us, but they were more happy to know that my brother and I could communicate in Swedish. And when they knew that we could converse, they were very, very happy. Well then we had the same thing happen during that same two week period. My cousin had called some cousins in Småland and they also made arrangements on my mother's side and made the same kind of arrangements. And we went down there on a Sunday and met in a lodge and that was a beautiful gathering of all my mother's relatives. So we got to meet them all and it was a real joy and since that time, of course, there's been many contacts in the visits that we've had. My wife and I call Sweden. Now Teterholm, for some reason, is our favorite because the Teterholm people are almost like brothers and sisters. We're so close. Are they closer together than the only Risby? Yes. In Risby, the families are in different areas, but in Teterholm, my father's side, they're all from either Teterholm or Borås or Djur... Djur, I guess that's how it's pronounced. And Tbro and one family in Jönköping. So it's very close. So when we're in Teterholm, I have an opportunity to see them all. But we have many, many telephone calls back and forth. Every Christmas we call them. I go home at 12 o'clock noon and of course then at 7 o'clock in Sweden and it's to the point now where they expect that phone call. And whenever we have a birthday, a 50th or 60th or whatever, then there's phone calls and other times just to say hi. We want to call and see how things are going. So we do a lot of that. So that's a different world than when your father was living. Then there was only a letter maybe very occasionally. I think my mother would correspond with Ingeborg. She made mention of the fact that my father's relatives were very close to her. And they would have correspondence, but it would be letters, maybe like every four months or so. And the last couple of years of my mother's life, I did however have her in contact with her sister that lives in Risby. She has an 88-year-old sister, lives in a home place. And I always made arrangements to have telephone contact with her at her birthday or at Christmas. And my mother enjoyed that. So that way, in addition to her letter writing, why, she could just talk for 20 minutes if she wished. So what are they expressing in those letters now every week, 52 times a year? Well, you know, that's, everybody says that. Well, what do you talk about? But in our particular case, my wife will write and talk about our happenings with she and I and also with our three sons. And we have four grandchildren. And there's always something going on. For example, yesterday we had three grandchildren in the church program. And yesterday, my three sons and myself sang in a choir at church, which the men do at Christmas time, and it consists of 62 people. And my number two son is a director of that. And this is the seventh year we've done it. That's something that she can write about, something that we've done. And well, if we've had any, for example, we went to a Scandinavian dinner Saturday night. And we think so much about our heritage, or my heritage, my wife has accepted it, that we went to this beautiful, beautiful dinner. And I have three cousins in Rockford, my mother's sister's children, and we always invite them to go with us. So it's sort of our Swedish get-together, cousins in Rockford and ourselves, with my brother and his wife, we get together twice a year. So we had a smorgasbord. And that's something she can write and tell them about what we've done. And then, of course, it's the usual thing, the weather. It's snowing or it's cold or whatever. We get the weather report. We get weather report. In fact, every letter, and this is really, I think it's always so interesting because Barbara will say, it's so many degrees centigrade. And of course, our thermometer's got centigrade and Fahrenheit, but we always give it centigrade. But I have given them thermometers over the years, Leonard. We have big ones from the office that has centigrade and Fahrenheit. So they look at my thermometer. You know, they all have it and they all feel good about it. They have Orkner's thermometer. So anyway, they compare temperatures that way. So they make sense then when you have every week? I think every week we... I mean, they're giving the weather because they even know exactly... Yeah, we know. And also, it's almost true that if we have real cold here because of the west prevailing winds, they sometimes even carry into Sweden. So they'll say, well, now that we've got our letter, the weather you talked about last week, we've got it now. You know, that seems to be something that can happen very easily. Well, when my cousin gets... she talks about all the family and her mother and dad, her mother and father love to play bingo and they go all over to play bingo. And we have introduced them to dominoes. I don't know if you're familiar with this domino game, but it's a fun game. We have played Uno, those kind of things. And we've given them domino sets and Uno cards. They brought them back to Sweden. They play that a great deal. And the things that we've introduced them to, like the American hamburger, which is, of course, starting to be popular over there. But going back to 74, they would write and say, well, we had an American meal. We had hamburger and we had apple pie, those kind of things. And like my cousin says, she says, a day never goes by but what they think of us in this land. And I feel almost the same way because I'll look at my watch and I'll say, well, now at this time they're doing this or doing that or whatever. And it's strange how you do that. So you feel a strong connection then with Sweden? I have very strong ties, I think, with Sweden. The four times we've gone there, we've always stayed at the Sture Hotel. And my reason for doing that is I have so many relatives, I don't want to hurt anybody's feelings about staying with one person, not the other. But these people in the hotel are almost like family because they've given us the same room and we've gone to the same place all the time. And it was strange because in 1982, that was my 60th birthday, and my wife took us over and we were up and down in an airplane eight times. We went up to see the midnight sun. I'm trying to think of the name of the city as I sit here. Karuna? Karuna, yeah. We went up to see the midnight sun. Well, it was like flying from Stockholm up there one afternoon, coming home the next afternoon, just one day. But my mother always said, you must see the midnight sun, which we did. But I want to finish a story about the hotel. In 1982, we went there, it was in the month of June and part of July. Well, in July, of course, everything closes down. So at this hotel, there are 30 rooms. We wrote to my cousin and said, we'll make arrangements for our hotel room if you would please. And many times we've done it direct because we know them so well. But the hotel was closed. But our room was open and they gave us a key for the door of the hotel. And Betty and I were the only two in the hotel all the time we were there the two weeks. And they sent somebody in every day to fix up our room. So we think those people are especially nice to us. Good customers. Well, we're good customers because I suppose we have those dinner parties. But the point is they do it for us. You know, they Why did they close it down in the summer though? Was there a special Well, in July, of course, all of Sweden closes down. Everything closes down. Yeah, but you would think the vacationers You would think the hotels would be open because people traveling, but they closed down at the Tito Holm Hotel. Same as they do in the fabriks, where all the factories close down. I guess one of the pleasant things we had in that particular trip too, because we've been there at different months. You know, we've gone different times of the year. But that June and July part of it was really in celebration of my 60th birthday. And I played golf at St. Andrews in Scotland on my birthday, those kind of things, you know. But we got to see the midsummer festivities in Sweden, dancing around the Maypole and seeing all those kind of things. And that was one of the biggest joys we ever had. Every place we went is very festive. And everybody dressed in their traditional Swedish garb, which is a joy for me to see, because we have heard a lot about it, learned a great deal about it in our readings about Sweden. What did you learn when you first came over in 1974? They always say the Swedes are so withdrawn, you know, they are afraid to open up. They're bleak. They are bleak. Very much so. Yeah, they're bleak. It was very interesting because when we went to, not the first day, but maybe the second day, I found that everybody was, my cousins, not the older people, the three aunts and the one uncle that's living, that's married to my one aunt, they're very outgoing. And this one cousin who had been here to visit my mother was very outgoing. But everybody else seemed to be in reserve. And I thought that, it was strange. But I learned that even though the children had three years in school of English, they were afraid to try it. So finally my wife convinced one of the little kids to go into a bedroom and said, let's go in and talk English, because Betty doesn't speak English. Now one of my cousins' husband speaks it perfectly, so he's always side by side with Betty. You know, if I'm not there to translate, he can do it. But she took this boy into the bedroom and he talked, and then he opened up. But he was afraid to try it in front of a lot of people. Well then, another experience that I learned on my second trip over there, this one cousin who is a sister to the girl that writes to Betty, she started to open up a little bit. You know, I could put my arm around her and she would not shy away. And she got so she would put her arm around. It's just like we're cousins, you know, we're good friends. And I said to her, why were you so shy? Why were you so quiet on my last visit? And she said, well, I'll tell you why. And she opened up and explained it to me. That when my mother was there in 1954 with her sister, she evidently give those kids the impression that I was like a preacher. Now I've read lessons and done a lot of those kind of things in church, you know, but anyway, they got the impression that I was similar to a priest. And she said, I was afraid of you. I was afraid of you. She said, now that I've gotten to know you, we just love you dearly. And so we were accepted by everybody else at that time. But you can imagine my wife and I, how we laughed, thinking that my dear old mother had said we were like oppressed. Where did you get this outgoingness from, from your father or from your mother? My father, because when he was over here, it was more difficult for him to pick up the English than it was for my mother. You know, he working in a furniture factory around other Swedes, they always conversed in Swedish. But he did learn English. And he always said, I can remember him saying in many conversations that if you're going to live in this country, you should be an American, you should speak the language. Well, my mother spoke it very, very well. Was she younger when she came over? My mother was 16 also when she came over. She was born two years before my father. She was born in 1894. But they come over at the same time. She was working in Sycamore. My father was working in in Rockford. And there used to be a park called Harlem Park in Loves Park, which is only two blocks from where my father bought his home in Loves Park. Well, that's where they met. And then after a time being why or after a short time, then they were married. How was she able to learn English? Did she take work as a... She worked as a as a maid, housekeeper for a very wealthy family in Sycamore, a family by the name of Fisher, and worked for them for, well, she worked for a year and said to the people that she was going to go back to visit Sweden. And that Mrs. Fisher became ill. And she said, well, Jenny, if you'll stay another year, she said, I will not forget you in my will, that kind of a thing. I, you know, I don't remember all like what my mother had said about that conversation. But my mother did stay another year. And then the lady passed away. And my mother did receive money in 1933 during depression, quite a few years after they were married. It was many years after. Like today, you can settle estates in a short time, but then it took a long time. But they met and she spoke very good English. And when they were with relatives, they always conversed in Swedish. And my brother and I learned it from that. But when he talked with us in home, in the home, it was always English. So I was not like many young people that went to school that didn't understand English here in Rockford. I spoke perfect English, of course, when I went to school, because that's what they used with us. How many were you? I have one brother. Two children only? There was two children only, yes. Yeah, my brother Edward, he was formerly mayor of Love's Park. And he was... And his name was? Edward. Edward. He met the king of Sweden when he was here, King Carl. In 76? In 76, he was mayor at that time and has a beautiful large picture of the two of them. And my brother received a medal just because of the position he held. But we're very proud of that picture. And all my relatives in Sweden are proud of that picture. The fact that their relative... They've probably never seen it. They've never even seen the king, many of them, you know. One of the experiences I had over there too, Leonard, I should tell you about, my second trip. My little, my cousin's little boy in fourth grade asked me, after his teacher, of course, had said it was okay, asked me if I would speak to the class in the grade school there in Titoholm. And I said, sure, I'll be happy to come over. So I was invited over there and there were 40 students and four teachers. And I was invited to speak and I spoke for 40 minutes. And of course I asked the teacher, what would you like for me to talk about? And she says, well, they're interested in knowing about your boys, what they like to do, and what you do, and your family ties and so on. Well, there's many words that I can't say because I've not practiced them. For example, I didn't know how to say basketball. So you had lectured in Swedish, then? I lectured in Swedish. I spoke for 40 minutes in Swedish and answered questions too. I first sort of gave a story about my roots and my interest in this country, that country, Sweden. And then I, because I couldn't say the word basketball, I would say, well, he bought a cast at a rundboll or goså, and then somebody told me what it was, see, one of the kids. So it made it real easy for me. But I enjoyed that immensely. And the Christmas that followed, I got a handmade Christmas card from every kid in that class that I have at home, an album of 40 Christmas cards. And since that time, I've received three letters, and this dates back now a long time, from kids in the class, and they'd send me a picture. Well, they even wrote to me, by the way, and said they wanted my picture that they put on the bulletin board. And the teachers today even talk to my cousins about Orchard, you know, which, you know, makes you feel good, makes you feel good. But after I got through talking, then they all invited me to go to have dinner with them. So I sat down with those 40 kids and four teachers and had a beautiful dinner in the school. I'll never forget that. That was an experience and excitement in my life. And many of those kids probably had relations in the United States. Yes, some had it, you know, like some would say, well, Chicago, they had an uncle, and they'd ask me about Chicago and, well, New York or something else, you know, they would make inquiries about it. Your father, now, the reason he came over here, was it that he couldn't find an employment? There was no employment for him. It was hard times. And he come over first, and then right after he had a brother that came over. So he came during the First World War, then, or shortly before? Well, let's see. I'll try to figure out now. He was born 1896. 1912. It'd be 1912, yeah, is when he come over here. So he hadn't really started to work in Sweden then? No, but he'd had all the formal schooling he was going to have at that time because of that deep depression they had. And his uncle in America said to his parents, evidently, well, if Einer would come over, I can find him employment. So he sent a ticket and... Yes, yes. In fact, the third trip I made to Sweden, I made it a point to find out where that uncle was. And he was buried in a cemetery many miles from Tito's home. So he went back to Sweden, though? He went back to Sweden after, yes, because I never met him. I never met him. He was here and got my father started, and my father got his citizenship. And then his brother came over, a fellow by the name of Bernard Anderson. He came over, and he stayed. Well, his wife passed away in 1933, and then he had three children. So then he went back to Sweden with the three children. So he stayed in Rockford on the first day? Einer? His father. Yes. He stayed in Rockford. In Rockford. Yes, until he was married and he bought this home in Love's Park. How about during the First World War? Was he drafted then? No. No, my father wasn't in the war. And I don't know the circumstances. But he was not a citizen then, by that time? He was not a citizen at that time, right. No. He became, in the 1920s then, a citizen? Yes. Well, he became a citizen... No, I remember that, because I was very, very young. Maybe in... I was born in 1922. Maybe I was four, something like that. But I can remember the excitement on the part of becoming a citizen. You know, carrying that little flag home, and how important that was to him. How about your mother? Was she automatically a citizen then? No. She also went for citizenship. No, wait a minute. No, she was automatic. That's right. She was automatic, Leonard. I had to think about that a minute. When my father became a citizen, she became a citizen. I don't really remember, you know, specifics on those things, but... So then he was able to vote? Then he was able to vote. Was he interested in politics or with the locals? My father was not that outgoing. Now, he belonged to his church. He was chairman of the board of his church, Grace Lutheran and Loves Park, where I have belonged since they started in 1925. And I've been chairman of the board twice. My brother's been chairman of the board since. My father was... Well, the church was very small, of course, when he got started. Now we have like 1,500 members. But the Anderson family has been involved in that church a long time. So he was interested in both your mother and your father in the church? My mother was always involved with the ladies' groups, had been chairman of several of them, and I can remember my father when he was made a warden, just when the war broke out. He was made a warden in the community, you know, where you'd have to be sure the shades were pulled and the lights didn't show. And when he had to go and take the exam, he asked me to go and write it for him, which was very unusual. But he wanted to do the responsibility, but didn't feel that he could write in English the answers to the questions. So when I... I can remember doing this because I was somewhat embarrassed that I would be there alongside of my dad writing answers for him because he was intelligent. But he was afraid he couldn't write in English the kind of answers they wanted. So he would tell me the answer and then I'd write it out. I always remember doing that. I was embarrassed then, but I'm more proud today, the fact that he would do it, you know, really, really impressed me. In fact, my first trip in 1974, my youngest son was 16 years of age. And it really struck me then, the importance of my father leaving his family, leaving his country, going to a new land where he could not speak the language and having the fortitude to do it. And I asked my youngest son then, I said, Gary, could you do this? I said, you know, Grandpa, come over here and did all this. And it really struck me home that I was more proud of my father then than ever, although I always thought a great deal of him. So your early years then, you're not a brother now, how much difference in age? He's three years younger than I. Yes, three years younger than I. I'm the oldest. So when you were about 9, 10, 11, 12, you brought home new terms of language and taught your family or your mother and father then? I'm sure that's what happened, yes. They picked up from you? They picked up then from me various English expressions. But they still have respect for what they said, what to do and so on? Very much so. We had a great deal of family love and respect in our... You went to Sunday school and every Sunday? Every Sunday, never missed a Sunday. And that's what sort of hurt me when I went to Sweden and found that people didn't go to church except it was on a Children's Day. What did they say about it in Sweden though? Did you discuss it with them? Oh yes, very much so because the first Sunday I was there, the first weekend, I said I'm going to church. I want to go to my father's church because I was in Tidholm at the time. I want to go where he was baptized and confirmed. And I didn't ask anybody if they wanted to go with me. I just said I'm going to go to church in the morning and nobody volunteered to go with me the first time. After that, I always had somebody who wanted to go with me. I think they learned to respect the fact that I would want to do this. But when I went to church, there was only nine people in the church and they were all men. In the city church? In the city church, a white church right across from the Studehotel. And the pastor even came down from the pulpit in the front pew and the nine of us sat there. And he talked to us, you know, read the lesson and talked to us about his sermon for the day. And I have gone to that church every Sunday I'm in Tidholm. And I've gone to my mother's church. Both churches, they gave us a catechism because I, of course, talked to the pastor, told him, you know, who I was and why I was there. And he opened up the book and we saw where my dad's name was recorded as being baptized, where it's recorded, where he was confirmed. And the same thing with my mother. And I thought that was interesting. They would show us those books. Did your parents talk much about the church life in Sweden? I think when my parents were there, that they attended church regularly. But I don't know when it became a state-owned church. But things change because my, all my relatives, and this is a part that my wife always questions, that during the Advent season, for example, they burn candles in their home. Now we don't. Now we do in our church always, but we don't burn candles in our home. I know many people do, but we don't. But over there, they always do. And I remember when the king's first baby was baptized, we were in the church the day before he was baptized. And then the day he was baptized, we were at my cousin's house, and they lit a candle, put on the television set, and we had a regular party because of that baptism. So they have a lot of feelings for the church or for the Word of God. And they just don't attend services unless it's a family day or children's day, and then they all go. Do they belong to the covenant church or Methodist? Lutheran. They're all Lutheran. They're all Lutheran. All my relatives are Lutherans. Because there's an area there with a lot of covenant. Uh-huh. Yes, there are. I knew that, too. But they don't belong to it. But they don't, do they explain anything about it? Yes, they pay a tax that pays for baptism, weddings, and funerals. They pay a tax for it, and they all do it. But other than that, I think because it's state-owned, they don't have the same interest we have in our church because we can pretty well set our own programs and set up our own bylaws, you might say, to operate our church. And I know a lot of rules are passed down by the higher church, but nevertheless, we sort of control our own. But because they don't, I think that's one of the reasons they don't attend like we do. They don't have the same feeling, then, to see what it's like. I think they have a spiritual feeling within them. Now, every year we go there, for example, in Teterholm, my wife and I, we buy eight bouquets of flowers, red, white, and blue flowers, always go to the cemetery because I go to my aunt's, my uncle's, my grandparents, and we put these flowers on. And I've seen them stand at the graves, and they have a tear in their eye. They all take care of their graves every week. They go in there and put cut flowers on it, and I think that's a feeling about the hereafter. You know, of course, it's a feeling of love for the family also. But that's a part of it, I believe. So they're all good people. They're really good people, and a good family people. But you perhaps have brought a new meaning to it, what the family and the ties mean, because of you coming back now so often. I think so, too. I think, you know, they know that we have good feelings toward them because we are related, and we try to do the same thing in Rockford here with the three cousins we have, and that's why we get together at least twice a year. You know, we don't want to just fall apart like so many people seem to have it happen. But over there, it's a tremendous love. And as I indicated to you, I went back in October of a year ago to surprise my uncle, who's not even related by blood. He's just married to an aunt, but he was 75 years old, and we made it a point to go and pay them a visit. When your dad, now he got a job in the furniture factory, that was his first beginning of employment here in Rockford. Yes. How did he get that? Was his uncle... I think his uncle helped him get that. Was this Scandia or... That was Rockford Republic. Rockford Republic. And I can remember that as a very little boy, because my father would work on Saturdays, and I was always invited to go with him on Saturday mornings, which I'm sure my mother liked. There was a streetcar then going on North Second Street. Yes, there was an in-urban that went, well, it went from Rockford all the way to Janesville, Wisconsin, Floyd, Wisconsin, that area. So Loves Park was very small then at that time. Yes, it was not a city at all, it was just a name. Loves comes from a name of a family that owned a large farm here, 240 acres. His name was Love, L-O-V-E. So everybody identified this area by this large farm as Loves, and it became Loves Park. Now we're incorporated, now we are a city, but at that time when my father bought his home, it was not a city. So yes, he would take the in-urban, and we'd go to, or he would go to the Rockford Republic. But I would go Saturday mornings, and they'd give me a hammer and a nail and do whatever. And I can remember one thing very vividly, that a fellow that worked next to him had no family, but took a real liking to me as a youngster. And this man not too long after committed suicide, and he had a gold watch that was maybe the only thing that was of any value, and that was left for me. And I've never forgotten that. And I, you know, I must have been like four, five years old, something like that. So he was an old Swede. But he was an old Swede and had no family, and he decided that I should have the gold watch, which I still have and still works. So how long did your dad work there? Well, my father worked there until a very close friend of his, who was also from Sweden by the name of Cy Meyer, has Meyer Sheet Metal Company in Rockford. And Cy Meyers and his family and my Aunt Knuckle and our family were always together New Year's Eve, always. We were together with my Aunt Knuckle for Christmas Eve, but with the Meyers on New Year's Eve. That was a tradition. Never forget it. And a couple of the kids are still living, and I see them on occasion. But he asked my father if he'd come work for him. So my father went to work for him, and he worked about 12 years. Then my father had a heart attack as a very young man, and sheet metal work is heavy work, you know, putting in furnaces and so on. So he was given an opportunity to go to work then for Rockford Standard Furniture Company, which is on Railroad and 11th Street, to be a furniture repairman. So he then worked for Mr. West at Rockford Standard. Harry West. Harry West for the rest of his lifetime. So he did that, and that was easier work for him because of the fact he had a heart attack. How did you get started? You went to high school? Well, I graduated from high school at Harlem, and my intent was to go to University of Illinois and made an application, was accepted. I graduated in June of 41, but two months after, I received my first letter that I was going to be called into the service. So then, of course, I canceled my college education. I had been given a job the same, well, I was given a job two weeks before I graduated to work for this good friend of mine, Herbert Conklin, the insurance business. He had an insurance company he was manager of. And when he called me down for an interview, the principal had sent me down for an interview, I said, well, I was going to go to work for Woodard Governor Company because they invited me to work for them in their office. But then when I went down and met Mr. Conklin, I was so impressed with this man, and he told me about what my future might give to me working in that business, that I changed my plans and I went to work for the insurance company. So anyway, January 1 of 43, I did get called into the service, and I was in training in the United States and then went overseas, and I was in Europe 18 months. And I went over as a corporal and I was made a staff sergeant in the field, and then right at the war's end, I was made a first sergeant. I was in the field artillery with General Patton. In France? In France. I started at Metz, France, and then went to the Battle of the Bulge, and then went 60 miles from Berlin at Dresden when the governments made a plan that the Russians would go in and we would withdraw. So we turned around and then fought pocket battles all the way into Czechoslovakia. Now, while I was there at war's end, I thought, gee, it would be nice to go see my grandmother, who was living at that time in Sweden. But they would only let you go if you had a blood relative, brother or sister, mother or father, and not aunts or uncles or grandmothers. So I could not go, even though I was a first sergeant in a position to be persuasive in a sense, but I couldn't go then. But I always felt that someday I would go anyway. So you already then had a connection that the distance land of your I did. And I, you know, my folks said, you want to be nice? You're so close that you could get over to visit with them. And I would have loved very dearly to have met my grandmother because I've heard so much about her. And I have her clock hanging in my living room that I finally was able to trace down. But I've heard so many stories about her that she was quite a lady. Did you ask any questions of your father or mother? Or did they just tell you? Well, you know, I can't remember like whether they volunteered the information to me or if I was inquisitive enough to want to know. Because it's hard to know what kind of questions you should ask. That's right. Now, my mother in later life then talked a great deal about different things in Sweden. And they came back to them, the old times. Yes, yes. And, you know, I would listen then. Because as you get older, you get more interested in the past. I'm sure as a youngster, you're thinking more of the future. But then I, you know, I became interested in the past. But when my mother passed away, of course, we went through all the personal belongings and we took, you know, a full drawer of pictures of people from all over Sweden. And none of it meant too much to me. Because I really didn't fully understand what various names would mean until my first visit. And I became so inquisitive, so curious, so interested. You know, I have such a good feeling about my roots that I then could come back and put these pictures in perspective to understand who they were and what it was. Well, it wasn't long after we were over there, my aunt and uncle came over to visit us. And, of course, then I get the pictures out and have them all in album form. And those that I couldn't identify, they would help me with it. And fortunately, my father's people knew a lot of my mother's people just because of my mother and father's relationship. For example, my mother's only sister, this Ingeborg that I speak of, my dad's sister, they travel from Teterholm to Risby, which is about three hours, twice a year at least, to go visit her, which I think is beautiful. Now, this year, she just went into a nursing home, but she's very alert to everything. It's just that it's too difficult to do her own things in her own home. Were you able to comprehend the difference between the Småland and Västergötan when you first talked about it? Well, the big difference was that in Teterholm, people are more like we are. They're on the go, they enjoy travel, they enjoy a lot of outside activities. We're down in Småland, for example, we keep saying my mother's home is two and a half miles off the blacktop, back in the woods. And we keep saying, my aunt, I'll bet she doesn't get out of that place more than half a dozen times a year. I don't know, maybe it's a few more times than that, but it's all confined to coffee and cookies in that area with all those people. Whereas in Teterholm, we have our card games and we have a little schnapps, which they don't do in- Are they more religious down in Småland than- They're more religious down there. They don't have those drinks. They do more of them in the church perhaps? They do more of that than they do in the Teterholm area. Now, my aunt, because she was getting older, in Risby, always went to church with me. I said, you know, Aunt Amelia, or Mootster Amelia, we'd like to go to church, I'd like to go with you, she'd say. I always remember the first time we went over there during the day because we went to visit her husband's grave and my grandparents' grave. In 1974, we left our house, September 4th of 1974, to go visit. September 4th, her daughter died. Her daughter and my aunt were baking cookies for us. We left 9 o'clock from down here at Tavala Temple to go on a bus. At the same time, 9 o'clock, September 4th, only of course, it's a seven hour difference, my cousin passed away in Teterholm, or in Risby, 44 years old. She was there baking cookies, waiting for us. And that was a sad thing. So, I took my aunt and we went to the cemetery. And when we got in Teterholm, that's when they told us, but we couldn't go to the funeral because it was going to be on the day that we had our big party. And all these people were invited, and you know, they've all been contacted. And of course, they only bury them there like on Saturdays. She died on a Saturday, was buried on the next Saturday. So we ordered red, white, and blue spray, had a big spray sent down there. Well, then the next day, that Sunday is when we went down there. So we took my aunt and we all went to the grave. And then we wanted to go to the church. So she had called the minister and he met us at the door and it was so interesting because he went behind the tombstone to get the key so we can get into the church. We all laughed about that. That's where they keep the key behind the tombstone. But that was sort of a sad visit in Risby because of that. How, if you go back now to your employment for the insurance, Cochlan, he was an Irish? No, Cochlan was Scotch. C-O-N-K-L-I-N. He was Scotch and he was from our school district. And he had called the principal and said he wanted a young man that... So your family didn't know him then? No, my family didn't even know him. He wanted a young man that perhaps would have a future in this. So the superintendent was the one that suggested me when I went down there. When I come back from the war, I lost my right eye in Germany during the war. And I was hospitalized ten and a half months. And this eye is all gone. But the reason I'm telling you this is that when I come back from the war, they were treating me for nerve problems because, you know, we liberated two prisoner war camps and we were very much involved from the Battle of the Bulge On. So after I got out of the hospital, I thought, well, I'm going to go to school. So we reapplied to University of Illinois. Another good friend of mine who's chairman of our bank out here, he and I have been lifelong friends since sixth grade. We both reapplied to the University of Illinois, both accepted. And about, oh, I don't know, a month after he called me up, he said, let's have lunch. And so we went and had lunch. He said, you know, we're older. He said, I like my work. He worked for a bank in Rockford. I said, well, I like my job. So we made a decision not to go to college, just stay with our work. So I've been in the business all these years. And last June, counting from June 6, 1941, it's been 45 years I've been in the business. So you learned it from the grassroots? So I was given the opportunity in those days to prove myself, whereas today, if you go into a business, you must have a college degree, as my three sons have. They've all graduated from college. Your parents, now, were they influential in telling you what to do? No. No, except to be the right kind of a person and never say anything about the kind of work I should do. When I graduated from eighth grade, I was given a job as a shoeshine boy in our Forest Hills Country Club. And I was a shoeshine boy for three years. And that was during the times when money was hard to come by. It was a fashion time. Yes. So it would help for me to make those few dollars to buy some of the things necessary for me. So then the fourth year, when I was in high school, then I was a caddy master. I worked there for a year. And they wanted me to come back after that. But I said, no, I, you know, I had this job and I wanted to do it. I guess maybe one reason I want to say this about the American dream is that I was a shoeshine boy three years, caddy master one year. When I was a shoeshine boy, I never got out of the basement of the club. You know, all you do is shine shoes, just shine shoes. And you were paid only by the grace of the… Well, I was paid 15 cents an hour plus tip. 15 cents an hour plus tip. And you keep that money? And I keep that. But year before last, and this is why I think the American dream is so true, year before last, I was president of Forest Hills Country Club. So here I went from the basement to the top floor. I say that only because, you know, here I'm not even a college graduate, but I do have a keen interest in seeing that things are done as I think they should be. And I think a lot of that is from my roots in Sweden, because there was that tremendous desire to do things right. And when I try to learn more about my grandmother and my grandfather, my grandmother was a very strict person and was quite demanding that things be right. And I think much of that is through her too. How about your brother now? Was he… he was three years later. Yeah, my brother was three years… What kind of interest did he have? Was he a go-getter like you two? Yeah, he's always been a go-getter. And he went in the Navy. He ended up in Japan. My folks are always proud of the fact that I was… I took care of that side and he took care of that side. But he was in the Navy. And unfortunately, twelve years ago, he had a heart attack. And he had one about two years after that. What kind of work did he get into? Well, he's right now… at one time he had a gas station when he got out of the service. He bought a gas station here in Loves Park. And then he developed from that an oil delivery where he'd go out for fuel oil for people. Well, now he's an executive with Kelly Williamson Company here in Rockford. And he has been for, oh, I guess seventeen years, something like that. So he has a good job. But he was also mayor. And mayor jobs here, it was part-time. So he was interested in politics then? He was interested in politics. What kind of a Democrat or Republican? Well, here it's not either in Loves Park. It's non-political. It's non… yeah. You don't have… But you are elected to elections though. Well, it's an independent election though, see. Yes, it is an election. But you run as an independent, not as a Democrat or Republican. Now, I have the same interest in politics. I was on the elected school board twice. Promised my wife I'd only go on twice. I was appointed by the Rockford Sanitary Board, or to the board by the Rockford County Board, or Winnebago County Board. So I was appointed to serve on that. And then I've been involved in so many insurance companies. I'm on nine corporate boards. And I'm on the hospital board, Swedish American Hospital Board, and the Blind Center Board, and the Lung Association Board. I got off as trustee of the Sanitary District, Rockford, and then they made me a commissioner. Now, I'm an individual, and my responsibility is to be sure that the assessment made against a property owner is correct when the Sanitary District goes in and makes their project. So we both had an interest in politics in that sense. And none of us, and neither of us, have ever been defeated. So we feel good about that. So are you Republican? I'm Republican. I'm on the GOP Finance Committee. How about your dad now? Was he more on the Democratic side? My dad was more Democrat, yeah. Because a lot of people in Tehran were more Democratic. Yeah. Social Democratic. Socialistic kind of a thing. And my father was that way. But my father was not noisy about his involvement in those kind of things. What happened now when you started to date girls? Did your mother say anything about it? No, not at all. Definitely. In those days, I was too, she'd always say, well, it'd be nice if you would date a Swedish girl, and it'd be nice if you dated a Lutheran girl. And I can remember hearing that, you know, in their conversations, that somebody would get married, well, that girl, she was Catholic, and oh, that was just absolutely terrible. Well, my wife is Scottish. How did you meet her? She and I graduated the same year in high school. So you were friends in the school? Yeah, but I never dated her in school. And that's the strange thing about it. And she was Presbyterian, too. But when I get back from the service, I was president of my senior class in high school, and I felt it was my responsibility to assure that we had a class reunion. And I've always had that. In fact, we just had our 45th in September, and I was chairman of that and master of ceremony and all that stuff that goes with it. But I took that responsibility and have that thing on the bottom is a complete file on that, that brown file, because I still have worked on it. But when I came back from the service, after my illness and the hospitalization, I went into a restaurant here in Loves Park in an evening with a friend of mine. And Betty was there, and she was with a Navy lieutenant. And she introduced me to him, and she said, I'd like for you to meet Art Anderson from Freeport. And I thought, well, girl, you're all mixed up. I'm Art Anderson. Well, what happened to be, his name is Art Anderson, and my name is Art Anderson. And I thought she was a little screw in the head when she introduced me to him. But that was quite a coincidence. So I asked her that evening, I said, we're going to have, make plans for class reunion. Will you serve on a committee with me? And she said, yes. So I said, well, we're going to have a committee meeting, two or three days, whatever it was. And that day on, we went together. So then we were married. So little did they know then, your parents, that she was going to be a Swede 100 percent? No, but see, fortunately, my father got to know Betty. Yeah, both of them, my dad in 1950, he really liked Betty, really liked her. And it was fun to see that. I don't think my dad really ever said it. My mother said it about marrying a Swede and about marrying a Lutheran. But my mother really accepted her because she's from a good family in Argyle, and Betty was always so nice to them. Well, I suppose the Catholic was the worst. That was the worst for people to take. But even now that it happens, I don't think anybody objects to it today, because it's who the person is. But in those days, yes, it was different. So, and then how about customs now when you got married and you start to raise your family, the three boys, you know, how did you, did you concentrate on one culture or did you bring up... Well, we had a difficult time about church. We were married in her church, which is a Presbyterian church, an old church up in Argyle. But it's not too much different, or... There isn't too much difference, no, not too much difference. But we would go to her church once, go to my church once, then we'd get downtown and go to a church. We really didn't have what you'd call a church home, because... And then one day she said, you know, when we have children, our children should be going to church here, because we built our home the year we were married... The year last fall. Yeah, where I live on Theodore Street. And if you've got a minute, we leave. I'd like to take you over there, because I want to show you my Christmas decorations. Why don't you see that? But we built our home. She said, I think we should go to this... I should join Grace Lutheran. And of course, that made me feel good. And of course, it made my folks feel good. Or no, my father... I can't remember if it was done in 50 or 51, but I know my mother really felt good about it. But she made the decision that we would do that. So then, of course, we would have our kids grow up in a Lutheran church. As far as customs go now... Not really. And as far as customs go, we have Swedish food all the time. She loves it. She learned from your mother? She learned from my mother, yeah. She learned a lot of things from my mother about how to make and prepare different things. Did your mother stay in your home then before you? No. No. I talked to my mother, who lived on Pearl Avenue in Loves Park, and I said, now, when you want to leave this house, I said, I'm going to build a four-family apartment behind the office. That building behind the office is mine. So one day she called me, and she said, well, I think maybe I better... Because it was almost an acre of land, and I was doing all the expending on it. I was having people do this and do that and everything else over there. And I was happy she said that so we could sell it. So then she lived in the apartment for eight years and then was in a nursing home for 54 weeks when she passed away. But she did have eight good years over here. So you could see her almost daily on the TV? Well, and that's the way it was. If I would come to work in the morning and that shade was not pulled up in a bedroom, then I would make it a point to check it out. And then in the last year, let's see, last three years that she lived over there, I had a lady come in every day and take care of her because it got to be difficult for her. So your three sons now, they... You were still living then? Yes. Yes. So how did they cooperate with you? Oh, they thought so much of her. They thought... She was very strict. My mother's always been strict, yeah. But they would learn to adjust to that and understand that's the way it is when you go to grandma's. But they remember her well. My father was more easygoing, and in fact, I don't think I ever got a spanking. I never remember getting a spanking from him. I remember one time from her, and for a good reason, because I went down and got into a boat on Rock River here. Friends of the family had a boat, and I walked down and got on a boat and pushed it out from shore, and there was a long rope on it. I wasn't smart enough to pull the rope so I could get in the shore, and I sat out there until somebody come and pull the boat in. But I was only five years old or something like that. But I got a spanking from her on that time, and I'll never forget it. There is an expression in Sweden, you know, they threaten the small kids for necking. Did she tell you that word? No, no. It was never used to you? I never got any advice or guidance on that at all, which, you know, I thought about when my kids grew up because I thought, you know, I've got to be sure they understand life. Is there something Swedish that's stuck with them all their lives that they didn't want to go apart with, or did they get Americanized, do you think, like most of them did? No, they... ID, for instance. For Christmas, no. Christmas, it's all Sweden in our homes. But I think it is a lot where I am, because I have all the foods my mother used to have. The only thing we don't have is dypigrytan, which I sort of miss because it was tradition on Christmas Eve day at noon. We always had it. We don't have it at home. But that's the only thing. Otherwise, everything else we get and my wife prepares for us, and I even get up and have it for breakfast sometimes because I like it, you know, when you have it during Christmas time. They always kept those traditions at home. And I think the decorating, Christmas decorating that they did in their home was very traditional Swedish. Did they use spruce for Christmas tree? They had spruce, and I can remember when I was very young, they had candles, which, you know, finally, of course, that was done away with, but it was just too risky. Do you remember live candles? I do, I do, yeah. But they used spruce, then it was more... Yeah, it was......thinner, gross. Yep. Yeah, they had spruce most of the time then. And then lute. And I don't stick with that because I always go get a tree that's been treated and it's got all flocked and all that stuff. But our tradition, keeping it, and I have to feel good about my wife just sticking with it, you know. It's marvelous, why it must be very unique to keep the correspondence going for so many years. Oh, I think that's the beautiful part of it all. And all of our relatives. You're probably the only one in the United States. I bet we are. I'll just bet anything we are. And then my aunt, who is this Barbara's mother, is Singapore, she maybe writes to us about every three months. And Betty writes to my mother's sister the same way. And if anybody writes to her, she'll write back to them. But this one cousin, of course, then conveys all the information. Now for seven years I have sent gifts to Tito's home. Seventeen presents. And I've gone out and bought presents, wrapped them, packed them, shipped them by air. Two years ago, the last postage expense was $135 for three big boxes. I thought, that's sort of dumb. You know, that's dumb to spend that much. So when I was over there in October a year ago, I said to my uncle, I'm not going to send any more presents. But instead I'm going to send you a check. Now this tells you how we feel about them. I sent them a check for $250. I did last year and I just did a week or so ago. And then they go to the hotel and have a big Christmas party on Arthur and Betty. And then they always send me pictures of all the things they're doing, you know. But that's what I do now. Because rather than pay for the postage, I'd rather give them the money and let them have a nice party on us. It's marvelous. Most of the people will say that there's so many things that we can't do that at Christmas time. I mean, you have a business, a big business. Yes. And you've been a politician and been on boards and trustees on bank boards. How do you get the time? I make my time. Because this is trivia. Yeah, I make my time, but people get frustrated sometimes. And I don't. I have... People will say, heck with it. That's right. Now here's, just to look at it, here's my kind of a schedule I have, different things I've put up. Of course, right now I'm almost retired. So, but, you know, each time you look in there, you'll find all kinds of things we do. But I sort of schedule everything and it just works out fine for me. Now tomorrow morning, Betty and I go to Pekin. And that's 150 miles from here. And tomorrow night they have a Christmas party. But I'm on five boards down there. Insurance. Insurance boards. Yeah, we have, it's a group of companies, but I'm on five boards. And tomorrow afternoon we have a meeting at three. We have a Christmas party tomorrow night with the directors and wives. And next day I have a board meeting. But I just, just my time. And I never get frustrated by it. I keep records. If you look, if you could just see over here, Leonard, you see all these briefcases? Yes. And each one is for a different group that I'm with. So when it's time to go to one of those meetings, pull out that one and bring it up to date and go to the meeting, you see. You actually have to have an archivist then to keep it going for you. What do you, sort this out yourself? Well, like this meeting, this meeting, yeah, I have my own system. But this morning, this meeting I went to, and that was the first meeting. Because they just appointed me to that committee. But I believe in it so strongly that I said, yes, I'll serve, you know. And now what I've done this morning, I'll put that on dictation after a while. My girl in here will then type it. That'll go into my file. So there will be a new addition to Lars Park then on North 2nd Street? Well, all of North 2nd Street next year, we're going to tear up all the pavement, all the curbs. Going to put all new streets and curbs in. But our responsibility is to try to eliminate all these darn wires and try to dress it up. I want to get rid of all those electrical wires and telephone wires and cable wires and old telephone poles. That's going to be our responsibility. This is modern thinking, you know, years ago because of the wide street in North 2nd Street. Yes. So it's easy for you to work with. Yeah, Loves Park is The streets and the sidewalks. Right. Loves Park has had this wide boulevard, as you might say, you know, for a long time. And it's going to be redesigned a little bit differently this way on turn lanes. But our idea is to dress it up well like 7th Street and East 8th Street and Broadway and Rockford, where you don't see wires and you get all new light poles and it's very attractive. And they need business people, property owners, to be involved to get this done. And also political contacts, you know, so you can go to Springfield and talk to somebody about money and stuff like that. It's a challenge and I want to see it done. So we're going to go with it. They say the Swedes are running Rockford, so there are some Swedes in Loves Park too then.