 Here we have 10th of October, 1987, and I'm sitting together with Reverend Vernon Sirenius of Alexandria, Minnesota, and he was born 17th of July, 1904, in Cadillac, Michigan. Your father-in-law, Arnold Sirenius, he was a covenant minister, you said? Yeah, well, my dad was an orphan. That is, his father died early, and his mother was killed by lightning on the front porch of their home in Sweden. And he had a couple of brothers and one sister who had preceded him to America. So after he was orphaned, he came then to the United States, and he settled in Providence, Rhode Island. And they had gotten affiliated with the Mifundsvendor in Sweden. So when he came, he got in with that group, and he worked in a factory where they made wheels for engines, steam engines, and so forth. But then he was a dedicated Christian young man, and finally went to the Covenant Seminary in North Park College in Chicago, and was ordained among them. And his first parish was at Harcourt, Iowa. And it was there that he met my mother. Her home was across the street from the parsonage, so it was a simple thing. So her family then, she came with her family then to Harcourt? Yeah. Your mother? Yeah, they settled in Lost Grove Township. Lost Grove Nation, isn't it? Or Lost Nation, or what is it called? No, they just called it Lost Grove Township. So they were farmers there then? Yeah, they were farmers and blacksmiths. Of course, all the farmers were blacksmiths after a fashion in those days. They had their own little shops on the farms. And they took land, you know, government land, and they became very well off, all of them, farmed. My grandmother had ten children, and they all settled around there with the exception of one, the youngest one, my mother's youngest brother, David. He went to Chicago and became an architect. But the rest of them settled there on Mother's side. Were they also Covenanters? Yes, all of them were Covenant people. But then, I don't know how much detail you want about this. Yes, as much as you have time to tell. But then, Dad, by this time, his first parish was at Harcourt. Then he moved to Chicago on the South Side and had his congregation there. And he got along well in the Covenant and was the first editor of Verbundet's Wicketiedning, which became the Covenant Weekly, you know. But there was a Baptist influence that was coming into the Covenant. Baptist influence? Yes, they were working against the baptism of infants. And Dad used his editorial position to—he was basically a Lutheran at heart. And he used his position there in the paper to write. He was a writer against this influence. But it had gotten so strong that finally he decided he was going to go back to his Lutheran church, which of course was a state church in Sweden, you know that. And principally because he wanted his two sons to be in the Lutheran church. He had a price to pay for it, of course, because the Covenant's people were dead set against that. So he was a contemporary of Nyvallen, Skogsbergen? Oh, yes, by all means. Oh, the big ones. Yes, yes. And they were often in our home there in Chicago. And I was baptized by Skog. And I remember him from Goyle. Yeah, those were— So he had some opposition then against his viewpoints. So they didn't like his— Oh, absolutely. And Mother's relatives were very adamant against his move into the Lutheran church. And by that time we had been—my brother and I had been rather indoctrinated. How old were you then when this happened? A freshman in high school. In Chicago? No, in Harcourt, because Dad had to go to the seminary in Rock Island for a year to change over to the Augustana Synod. So we stayed with my grandmother and grandfather in Harcourt that year. How did he explain to your morfaren, mormor, his position to turn over to be a Lutheran? He tried, but with difficulty. We had one uncle who was so adamant. Mother's brother, he actually said one day to Dad, he said, Ja, det er inte så illa att du ska gå till helvetet, men att du ska dra barnen med dig det. De vi inte tyker om. But his sons, they were not that way at all. They were fine, cooperative Christian men. And the rest of them, they didn't take such an adamant stand. It was only this Uncle Axel who did that. But in time that wore off, you know. But at that time, though, it was a very strict division between the Lutherans and the Covenants. Oh, absolutely. There was no exchange of pulpits at that time. Do you remember anybody from Covenant headquarters visiting your father and trying to persuade him to stay in with them? We had many visitors, but as a boy, I didn't pay attention to it. I paid more attention to how many biscuits they ate. So you were born in Cadillac in 1904. Your father was a pastor up there in the Covenant church. That's right. And how long did you stay on there as a pastor? Oh, I don't think I can remember that. Did you go to school up there? In Cadillac, just preschool, kindergarten. Then he moved to—well, after he was ordained in the Lutheran church, 1918. Oh, 1918. Yeah. Then we moved to Osceola, Nebraska out here. That was his first call. That was his first call. Then he stayed there until we were through high school. Then he moved to Wisconsin to a place called Sand Lake. He had a two-point parish there. Sand Lake was a country parish. And Dresser Junction, there was a little church there, the village of Dresser Junction. And he was there then for 18 years. At what synod meeting was he ordained to be a Nagashtana pastor? Well, it was in 1918, and I think it was in Rock Island. Were you present then at that time? No, I was not. How about the other relations from Last Nation? Or Lascaux? I don't know. No, there were none of them involved in his ordination, no. They still were two dyed in the wool. What did your mother say about it? Well, she got between the devil and the deep blue sea, you know. She had to take both sides. She had to take both sides. And we didn't—as boys, we didn't hear any big arguments about it or anything. She was a very kind, gentle person, though she had a mind of her own. But in all our life at home, I only heard them argue between themselves once. But she was a homebody, and she just devoted herself completely to her family. She was a good covenant person, and she became a good Lutheran, too. Lived until she was 87 years old and lived with us in her latter days. So she lived after your father, then? Yes, yeah. And in Osceola, did you go to high school there? Yes, I graduated from high school in Osceola. So you stayed on there a few years? And then I went on, yes, and then I went on to Augustana College. And seminary. Yeah. But I taught high school for two years between college and seminary. In Rock Island, or—? No, it was a little town in Wisconsin, close to where Dad and Mother were living. The place was called Centuria. And that, of course, is a whole story in itself, compared with what teachers do today and how they get paid. Why did you take that teaching job before going to seminary? Because, you know, I believe firmly in God's gifts of the Spirit to individuals, and my gift has been that of teaching. So it was a natural thing for me to become a teacher. And I'm very thankful for that, because it gave me composure in the presence of people, you know. And you probably can't imagine it, but we were two teachers teaching four years of high school, eight periods a day, plus all the athletics and class plays and operettas and what have you. And I directed two church choirs in Dad's parish and was president of the Luther League. And by the time spring came, I was ready to collapse. It was a heavy schedule. Oh, boy, and how. So you had to have a lot of respect with them to keep the kids on your thumbnail? Oh, yes, yes. Well, children in those days were different. They were not of a rebellious spirit. They listened to— Yeah, they respected authority, and fortunately the other teacher was the principal, and he was firm, and there was no real problem of discipline or anything. Your brother, Adolf, now, he was older than you? Arnold. Oh, Arnold, yeah. He was two years older. Was he also going to Augustana? Yeah, he graduated from Augustana. We graduated the same year because he taught high school in Lanyon, Iowa for a couple of years. And so we graduated together in 1926. Then he went to the University of Iowa, and he got his doctor's degree in education. And then he went to Valparaiso University at Valparaiso, Indiana, and was the head of the Department of Education there. Then he moved back to Augustana and Rock Island and was an assistant to Dr. Bergendorf and worked in student relationships and in the congregations. So he—now, Bergendorf was a little bit older, a few years, but not much. So he stayed at Augustana and all his teaching— Yeah, until he retired. Until he retired. Yeah. But he had that little—I think it was two years among the Missouri Synod and Valparaiso. And you continue on to be an ordained minister? Oh, yes. At the Augustana Synod. Oh, yes. And what year were you ordained? I was ordained in 1931. And my first parish was in Warren, Pennsylvania, in the Depression years. It was not easy. Oh, boy. Because the people kind of sat back there. Oh, it was terrible. It was terrible. And your salary was not much to live on, I suppose. It was $300 a year. And there was not exactly a farming community either. No, that was— They would bring in some eggs and butter and— No, no, no. None of that. That was an industrial community. It was oil, refining and furniture, and metal, steel, tanks, and so forth. And it was a very trying period, as you so well know. But I had a good-sized congregation, and we got along. But it was tough. You were not married then at that time? Yeah, I was married when we went out there, yeah. That's the third one from the right there. That's my first wife. She died of cancer at Emmanuel here. And she was from— She was from St. Paul, Minnesota, from the First Lutheran Church. So she's the mother of my daughter and our son. So it was not easy to survive on $1,800 a year. Did you have a car? I could buy a car for $500. Did they have a car? Not to perish, no. I had to buy it myself. Did they keep the same salary, or did they reduce it? It stayed. And we were able—well, it was a congregation of 500 people, 500 members. It grew even then. We got up to over 600. But, well, the only—like we had six, I think, six little refineries, oil refineries, because there were oil wells. It was in the Titusville area where the first oil wells were drilled, you know. Drake Oil Well. Yeah. And we had, I think, six little refineries, and the only one that survived the Depression was the one that made the base for Juergens Lotion. It was the only one? That was the only one that survived. And we had factories, furniture factories. I think there were eight or nine little factories, and only one of those survived. And those men who worked there, their salary was $15 a week. You can imagine trying to feed a family on that. But they were a sturdy lot, and they just kept going. And they did a lot of work around in the church, and the men were capable of doing that. So det gik. Det gik bra, ja. So you had cooperation with other churches in Titusville, Oil City, Caine, and— Yeah. How about Jamestown? Well, there was a difference there, though. Well, it was all in the New York Synod, New York Conference. Conference, yeah. And the president of the New York Conference lived in Jamestown, New York. And there we had five Augustanites. Was there Dr. Lincoln? Well, Julius Lincoln was there before. It was Felix Hansen. Oh, Hansen was the one. And in Caine, you had Beck. Yeah. But he was earlier than the one who was there when we were there. I forget his name. So how was the church in Caine then? Was that bigger at that time? Yes, it was. Tabor Lutheran. Yeah, yeah. And then we had Sheffield and Ludlow. Moriah Lutheran, or what was it called? Yeah, yeah. And we had a fine spirit. But of course, some of those old Swedes, they had minds of their own, you know. I still laugh about—did you ever hear of Jörn Forsberg? I heard the name, but I haven't— He was up in Erie. Yes. Well, when we had conference meetings, of course, the question was always the budget. How are we going to meet the budget? And all the—the name slips my mind now. Anyway, he was up giving a long dissertation, and he had the minutes before him. He would say, Here har vi den första lutherska kyrkan i Jemstown, och de har inbetalat så många tusen dollar, och jag ska säga, mina vänner, det är pengar det. And then he went to Emanuel kyrkan i Jemstown, och de har inbetalat. And he'd go down one after the other. Finally, one of the other old pastors got up, and he said, Jag förslår att Forsberg är dum. So the meetings were conducted in Swedish then? Oh, yes. Yes, I should say. I had to preach Swedish, of course, and I'd never studied Swedish, you know, in any way, shape, or form. Not in Dagestan? No, it was all conversational Swedish that I knew. You didn't have to preach sermons then at the Theological School? Well, only once in English, but never in Swedish. So they was gone by the wayside then, at the seminary? You were on your own when you got out in the congregation. How did that work, though? It was not easy to write the sermons. No, it wasn't. I wrote it out in English first, and then I had an Engelsk, Svensk, Svenskt Engelsk, Old Book, you know, and I just translated it. I look at those old sermons now, I have them all in my file, and frankly, they weren't too bad. No, but it was extra work, though, to sit there and... Oh, it took hours and hours, you know, and even at Dagestan in Minneapolis, I had to do that. Do you remember when they had a discussion about the first church in the New York Conference? Somebody got the idea it was in Wilcox, and they had gathered a big boulder and a plaque on it and everything, and then Chandler's Valley came in as the winner, of course. You were not at that meeting. No, but I remember Chandler's Valley. That was the first one in the conference. They called it Vala. Yeah. And I still remember the old preacher. I can't think of his name, but he had one of these big, we used to call them birth control Bibles, thick one up there, and he'd run his fingers along when he'd preach or when he'd prayed, and he'd dig in with his fingernails and that, so there was a ridge right across there, and he always prayed with his eyes open, with his fingers in there, and he'd shut his eyes and he'd say, and he'd tuck a devochary in his scaffolder, and then he went on rubbing his fingers back and forth. You were not located too far away from Chandler's Valley. No, no, that was only about five, six miles. Did you preach there too? Oh, once in a while, you know. I remember the first. Yes, but the district meetings, you know, they were interesting because we were all of one mind, you know, it was old Augustana spirit. Well, it was not easy, I suppose, because there was no money left over for anything. They had to be frugal and stitchy with the cents. Oh, yes. And, of course, around Chandler's Valley, there were some who had little plots of ground, you know, and raised gardens and shot squirrels and rabbits and stuff. They managed. Tough living. Yeah. How were the children of the immigrants? Because you met at that time a lot of pioneers still living. Yeah. How were their children? Were they more open-minded and easier to discuss the problems with or financial? Yeah, the people in our Warren congregation, the board members, deacons, and trustees were mostly middle-aged, but we had good Luther League programs, you know, and we conducted Bible camps. We had an annual Bible camp of our own up in Lake Chautauqua area, Jamestown, you know. It was good, but, of course, it was old traditional Swedish Lutheran, and I remember when we had deacons' meetings, I used to try to involve the men themselves in prayer, you know, at the beginning of a meeting, but that was like pulling teeth. I remember the first time I tried it, we sat in a circle, and I started with the fellow next to me, and I said, Brother so-and-so, will you lead us in prayer? He said, Oh, no, de, de can you inter-yura, de have you had re-yurt. So then I went to the next one, oh, no, no, it cleared around. We were 12 deacons, the whole bunch, and not one of them was able to make a prayer. And finally, one fellow, by the name of Anderson, whose father-in-law, Johnson, was on the board, he said, Say, dad, why don't you pray that little prayer you pray when you go to bed at night? So he prayed that prayer. Like, now I lay me down to sleep or something like that, you know. Well, then as the Depression wore on, then, of course, they got more serious, because they knew they had to turn to the Lord. So finally, I could get the whole bunch down on their knees, and we all prayed around the circle. So there wasn't a resistance. There was just tradition that held them back, you know. So they were shy then? Yeah, yeah. But why is that the Lutherans always been that way? They probably feel like they don't want to do something like what the pastor do. In Sweden, Lutherans couldn't go up and pray. Years ago, you know, there was the pastor job. I mean, they didn't want to even come close to that same platform. But the Baptists, they have witnesses and the covenants and the free church. But the Lutherans, they are completely taboo. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Well, that was the state church. So there was a hangover from the state church. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. But the next generation, you know, the children, they were more open than they used to talk to. Then when I came to Minneapolis, I spent... Hey, Sonny, be quiet. I spent eight years out there in Warren. Eight years? The whole Depression? Yeah, yeah. Then I went to Augustana Church in Minneapolis. That's the mother church of the whole Minnesota area. And there, it was an entirely different thing. And there, they were trained in participation in Bible study and prayer. Well, that was another ballgame. And we were there for ten years. That was the old mother church. They had, in Augustana, they had, what was it, 13 or 14 children in the Twin City area up there. They gave themselves away, but they had what they called mishoons, comiteen, a mission committee. And in the early days, they went to the train depot and met the immigrants as they came and helped them get established in homes and so forth. That's the type of ministry in the early days of the Augustana Lutheran Church in Minneapolis. When you were in Warren, did you have any dialogue with the Baptist and the Covenant minister of the Swedish church there? Yes, I preached in the Covenant church there. And also a Baptist? Yes, but we had nothing to do with the Baptist. But because of my background in the Covenant church, I did have. So I even preached in the Covenant church there. Did he preach in your church, too? No, no, he never did. I suppose principally because he never was invited. But I had a good relationship with him. Did you know that in the East, the Covenant church was called Covenant Congregational? Yes, because they didn't join the Covenants until very late. I remember the one in Smetford, they didn't join until 1946. So they were on their own. And that was probably the reason that they gave them money, the Congregationalists' board. And they gave the money to the struggling. And Dad's brother, Dad's history, I don't know if you're interested in that or not. Yes, yes. But he came alone and his sister was here and he had two brothers here. And one brother's name was Charles and the other's name was Carl. Charles went to Canada. He never married and we lost track of him. Except that Dad heard when he passed away, but Dad didn't go to his funeral. He was a homesteader in Canada. And what happened to his little farm, we never knew. Was he in Saskatchewan or? That I don't know. I don't know where he was. No, I don't know. But his brother Carl, he became an inventor. And he settled in Hartford, Connecticut. And his name was sitting in his also? No, no. His name was Johnson. That was my dad's name, Johnson. But I might as well tell you that story too. When Dad was at the seminary in Chicago, North Park, his name was Adolph Serranius Johnson, Yuanson. And there were other Johnsons there. And I guess Dad's got his love letters mixed up or something. So he went to the faculty and asked them what they thought he should do about it. And they said, well, why don't you drop your name Johnson and just take your middle name as your last name? So he did. Serranius was a bishop in the State Church of Sweden. And at that time, they had a controversy about keeping the teaching of the catechism in the public schools. And this Bishop Serranius, he fought for the keeping of it in the schools. And Dad's parents respected him. And so when Dad was born, they gave him the name Serranius as a middle name. The interview with Dr. Serranius continues next site. Next site. Site two. He invented the gauges for measuring screw thread. And that grew. And he had three sons. And they developed what they called Johnsons Gauge Works, headquarters in Hartford, Connecticut. And they had a worldwide business. And we've seen catalogs of the various types of gauges that they've invented and sold. During the war, they sold out to Pratt & Whitney. But then when the war was over, then the boys, the three sons, reestablished the business. And the only one of the three sons that is living now is the oldest son. But the grandchildren are now running the business. And apparently they make some of the finest gauges in the industry. So he had an inventive bent, his brother Carl. So he became wealthy, I know this. Oh yes, oh yes. He had three homes. He had one in Florida and one on the shore and one in Hartford. But they're all Mission Covenant people. Except the one boy was a Mission Covenant, but his first wife died. And he married into the Andrew Mellon family. So he became independently wealthy. Oh, the Mellon family in Pittsburgh? Yeah, yeah. So your cousin is still living, the oldest one? The oldest one, yeah. He lives in Hartford then? Lives in Hartford. He has the property there, you know. The two younger boys are deceased. What is his name? His name is Clinton. Clinton Johnson. Yeah. So were they from the kind of family with inventive streak, so to speak? Yes. How about your father? Was he... Well, of course, he was so involved in his Christian work, but he did things with his hands, but he didn't have the same gifts as his brother Carl. He could have developed along that line, I think, but my brother inherited more of that. He did a lot of... He had a shop of his own and did a lot of that type of thing. In Rock Island? Yeah. Do you remember if Waldenstrom was discussed at any time? What did your father think about him? Paul Peter Waldenstrom, yes. Yes, and I have some of his books in my library, and some of his writings. Because he certainly made a lot of havoc among the Lutherans when they came to the United States with tent meetings and revival meetings. I was baptized by Skoug. Yes. He was in Chicago at the time. Yeah, I remember those old fellows. They were quite talkative and good men. Do you also remember Skoug Spruik? The name, yes. But you never met him... Well, I suppose he came to our home, because Dad was very active in the Covenant until he left. They came and enjoyed Mother's good cooking. There was good rapport and good fellowship. It was a familiar feeling at that time. Oh, yes. Now they live in hotels and conference centers and everything. It's different. Oh, my goodness, yes. A lot of things have changed. And that's a big loss, I think. So after you were there at Augustana in Minneapolis for how many years? There was over the war then. Yes, ten years. Ten years. Yes. Then you came to Omaha. Yes. You were called by the Emmanuel Hospital or the... No, I was called by the Augustana Lutheran Church. The church, to be their pastor. Well, I was pastor and administrator of the Emmanuel Deaconess Institute. At the same time? Oh, yes. See, we had a congregation at Emmanuel in those days. Yes. It was a deaconess congregation. But we also had people from the community. When Dr. Samuel Miller came, he was my predecessor there. He involved the people in the community and the congregation, too. So it wasn't totally a deaconess congregation. But it was an official part of the Nebraska Synod. So I was pastor of the congregation. And, of course, we had a chaplain, and he assisted in the congregation. We had one other pastor in public relations, and he assisted, too. But we ran a regular church program. We had confirmation classes, and my son was confirmed there. One year, I had one pupil, one boy. So there was a smaller congregation than the... Yes. Oh, yes. Zion and Nagasen. That was a big one, of course. I'm sure that percentage-wise, we had the best attendance of any church in the Augustana Lutheran Church. And that was located, Meredith and... Fortieth, or is it? Thirty-sixth? Yeah, thirty-sixth. Close to the hospital. Yeah, it was right on the hospital grounds. So were you able to be the administrator at the same time, or was it a burdensome... Well, yes, it wouldn't have gone, of course, without the deaconesses. But they, if the one who was the administrator in the hospital or the head of the home for the aides of the home for the inlands of children's homework, because of their dedication, they assumed responsibility beyond what any employee would do. So the daily routine was carried on by... By them. Oh, yes. And then we had an administrative council among them that outlined the work of each division, and they assumed the responsibility far beyond what an eight-hour-a-day employee would ever do. So it went. It was a full-time job, of course, but day-yake. How big of a hospital was it, and how many beds were there? I don't know. I think Laverne could tell you that, because she was the head of the X-ray department there. A hundred and some beds. And they served the whole community? Yes. Oh, yes. And we built an addition to the hospital, of course, when I was there. We built an addition to the school of nursing, and an addition to the fourth floor of the home for the aides, because we needed more space. But that has all gone by now. And the Augustana Center, they were the provider with most of the funds then, at the time? Well, we were on the budget. We had to go and argue with them to get money, of course. But we had—well, they picked up the deficit, you know, but we had to be careful not to overspend. Because there was no insurance programs like there is today. Oh, no. To pick up the tab for the sick ones. I was chatting with Mr. Marr yesterday. The new administrator. And I told him about the time when we administrators of the various hospitals in the Omaha area got together and we were going to decide if we would raise the daily bed rate from $8 to $10. And after much discussion, we got enough boldness to raise it to $10 a day. Which provided nursing care and a lot of other things. And he laughed, of course. He said, well, now today it's $200 a day. What a contrast. But, of course, we could never have done it for that cost without the deaconesses. They did a lot of work. Oh, they just— They did work without pay many times, and 24 hours a day. They just didn't ask, what can I get out of it? It's, what can I give? So they were faithful day and night. And when reading those old anecdotes about the hospital, the nurses at the time, they even had to be the maintenance people to clean and scrub and do everything. Oh, yes. Oh, yes. Yes, yes. But we had faithful laypeople there, too, you know, like Emo Finman. He was there for many, many years and crawled through those tunnels at the risk of his life at night when something went wrong. They were just devoted people, that's all. They just gave themselves. They weren't thinking about an eight-hour day. But things change, as you know. But there's a lot of people who take that for granted. They don't think about those things at all. I mean the people outside who are working with them. So, and then, how was the neighborhood at that time? Was it a Swedish neighborhood around there? Well, it wasn't black like it's now. They happened in the 60s? Yeah, the transition was on, and they were coming in. They had these blockbusters, you know, who came in. Oh, they happened during your time? Yeah, that was the beginning. Like, our daughter lived up in that area for several years, and they got a blockbuster in there, the black people did, and little by little they began to sell off. So it grew, and now North High School is practically all black. You know that, I suppose. Yeah, I saw it on Ames Street. Yeah, yeah. They call themselves the Vikings, though. Black Vikings. Our son graduated from North High. No, I guess it was a daughter who lives here. And then after, you spent eight years there as an administrator also, and pastor. Then you moved to? Evansville, Minnesota. See, my first wife died after three years in cancer, and it was a hard time, you know, because I was left with two children and the heavy responsibility of trying to be father and mother and administrator and pastor was just more than I could take, so I remarried. I married one of the deaconesses, and we moved to Evansville, Minnesota. And we were there for 12 years. Wonderful, wonderful years, really wonderful years. There was a peaceful setting up there compared to Omaha, I suppose. Oh, yes, my goodness. Did you do some fishing there in the afternoon? Well, we didn't do any fishing. We were very busy, but then when we bought the property on Lake Carlos, and of course my wife, who loves fishing, she took it up with a vengeance. And we were there for 12 years, 12 happy, wonderful years. So your children, now, they have remained in Omaha the whole time? Well, not the son. The son went to Minnesota University after graduating from college and became a dentist, and he is living in Ohio, and he works for the Veterans Administration Hospital in Dayton, Ohio. And your daughter also went to college? Well, no, she went to Emanuel School of Nursing. And our son has three children, five grandchildren, so we have nine great-grandchildren, and our son is no longer a Lutheran. Was it because of his marriage then to another? No, no, he married a Lutheran girl from Roso, Minnesota, a very fine girl, beautiful person. But when they moved to Ohio, he joined an LCA congregation, and they were kind of happy there for a while, but then so much modern teaching came in, and he stood it as long as he could. Then they left and went to an ALC congregation, American Lutheran Church, and they were very happy there for a while. Then they got new leadership, and I see a lot of our young men come out of the seminaries these days. They are not fundamental. This is interesting. Now, you grew up in the—you actually have two religious cultures because of the covenant and the children. So you have knowledge of both backgrounds. But why is it now, the previous generation, they were satisfied then with the teaching, and they had tradition going to church Sunday after Sunday. But now today, then, it changes almost every month coming out of the seminary. Why is it like that? Because of a turning away from a full acceptance of the Bible as the revealed, infallible Word of God. But who got the idea? Like in Germany, in the pre-Hitler days, it started in the schools. It always does. Men become wise in their own conceits, and they don't believe in the infallibility of the Word of God. So they have to try to figure out something for themselves. And, well, Paul stood it there, and then the same thing came into that ALC congregation when they got new younger pastors. He started to look around again, and he wound up in a Christian missionary alliance. And they are very firm on the Word of God, and they have a missionary emphasis, and he's very happy there. So what do you... What happened in 1962 with the merger with the ALC and the Suomi Synod and the Augustana Lutheran? Was that a blessing to be bigger and... I can quote... Did you ever hear of... Well, you've heard of Dr. P.O. Bursell and Oscar Benson? Yes. Of course, P.O. Bursell, he was one of the promoters of that merger, you know. Did you ever hear of Dr. Wilton Bergstrand, director of the Augustana Youth? Jameson, yes. You know, the youth ministry? Yes. 25 years? You probably would be interested in his book. He has recently published a little autobiography. Well, it isn't so little, it's that thick. And he was, of course, in headquarters at Augustana in Minneapolis, the Augustana headquarters. And he was for the youth movement. Yeah, he was the youth movement. And in this book that he has written and published now, he quotes Dr. P.O. Bursell and Benson. And Bursell said, we were took. By what? By the ULCA in the merger. Like Wilton Bergstrand, he says... You've heard of Franklin Frye? Yes, he was the first president. He said at the time of the merger, Frye promised us that the youth program in the new LCA congregation would be based on the Augustana program that Bergstrand had developed for 25 years, and it was so wonderful. Frye promised that. But now Bergstrand said that was a lie, because he never had any intention of following that. And we know what happened to our Luther League work. But that's a bad religious teaching. I mean, they should be forerunners, I mean, to religious spirit. It was the dumbest thing that the Augustana church ever did. Why did they go along with it then? They were pressured by the ULCA. But they were independent, the Augustana. Yeah, I know. But you know, these men at the top, they get together and they talk and they talk and they talk. And that Franklin Frye, you know, he was a great persuader. And he just hoodwinked us. Well, maybe you don't agree with me, but... No, but it's interesting to see how they seem to cater more for the young people. They forget about the older ones. They go to church and they probably have more money to give in the collection plate than some of the younger ones. Why do they bypass them? They change the hymnal and they make it more modern and they don't feel comfortable anymore. Why is that? And it's doctrinal, too. You know, we go to our church in Alexandria, not every Sunday, because I've been involved at our Bethany home in chaplaincy work. So we have services there on Sunday. But these hymns... I don't know what your background is, but it's immaterial. These hymns that we sing, they're all doctrinal. See, they're not hymns of the heart. Now, my wife and I, we've gotten involved in the charismatic renewal. And the biggest delight I have is when she sits down at the piano in the evening and plays out of some of these old hymns, the old Black Augustana book with all those yart songer. But in our church, we don't use those hymns anymore. Well, many of them are not there. But thank God we have other hymn books where we can find them. Maybe it's a little of the covenant background in me, but when I sing a hymn, I want something that goes to the heart. Well, if you compare Augustana with the covenants, the covenants never had any pressure to join any other group. And they seem to sustain their... Yeah, my dad wanted them to come into the Augustana church, but... There were discussions about it, but maybe they were right enough to join. Well, I don't think it would have hurt them any, but since the ULCA took over Augustana, it would have been a bad marriage. Because they have kept the Swedish better, the covenants and the neutrals. Oh, yes. Do you still feel the Swedishness when you go into a church and you hear the singing? Yeah. A little bit more rhythmic? We attend a covenant church in Alexandria occasionally, and we feel at home there. My wife is evangelical. Though she had been born and raised in the Lutheran church, but she... I suppose you'd classify her as a real born-again, spirit-filled Christian. So... And now we're involved in the charismatic renewal, and we've promoted conferences on the Holy Spirit, and it's been a blessing to us. And my work now since retirement has been writing, because I have this burden for our Lutheran church, you know, and for the young seminary students who come out. And so I've written five, published five books, and the Lord has laid it on my heart to give those to our Lutheran theological students. We have some over 3,000 every year in the United States and Canada. So I print up enough. Who publishes those books? I do. For yourself? Yeah. Paying for the publishing? Oh, yes. Because the type of thing that I write, I don't know who would want to print it. Like this is the last one that I distributed. That is not modern. So you distribute them? You may have that. Okay, thank you. You cannot get them distributed through the Lutheran Church in America? I write directly to the presidents of the seminaries and ask them how many students they have enrolled and will they accept them as gifts. Then I include a return card in the letter and they send that back. Then I just mail them. Like our Lutheran Northwestern Seminary in St. Paul, they took 727 of those books and gave them to all the students. Did they pay for them? No, no, no. They're gifts. You have to pay for them? Oh, yes. But that's a tremendous monetary undertaking. Well, yeah. It costs money. It costs money. Fleas are some of the old Swedes used to say. But you have that conviction that somebody has got to open their eyes. Well, you see, when I was in the seminary, God's gift to me is that of teaching and I wanted to be a teacher. I was going to go to graduate school, but that was in those Depression days, you know, and I didn't have a million dollars for it, so I took a congregation. And then it was step up, step up, and I just never got to school. But I still had that burden of wanting to teach and particularly to teach in our seminaries to try to keep the young men on the right track, on the Word of God. But I never got to do that. So after retirement, I prayed about it and God said, Well, you know, it ain't hopeless yet. Write something and give it to the students, which I have been doing now. This is the fifth one that I've done it. Do you get any response? Occasionally. It's like the Lord said, cast your bread on the waters and you'll find them after many days. My wife has a sister who lives in Colorado. And we were out there visiting one day and she said, Say, I'd like to have you meet our new pastor. So she invited him over and his wife for an afternoon coffee. We sat there chatting and he said, Are you the fellow that wrote that book that we got in the seminary? I said, Yes. He said, I want to tell you something. He said, I was so discouraged with what I was getting that I was ready to quit the seminary. But one day I was walking out the door of the classroom building and I saw a box of books lying there. And I picked one up and it was your book on the making of a prophet, which is a study of the book of Ezekiel. And I took it home and I read it. And after I read it, I decided I was going to see it through. And here he was. He turned out to be a fine young Christian pastor. Well, that was worth every dollar that was spent on it. That particular volume to keep that young man in the seminary. So one person can make a lot of difference. Oh, my goodness, yes. Just like Martin Luther. Yeah, that's all it took. What would you say now, the founders of the Augustana City here, we have Esbjorn, Hasselkrist, and Langholz. What would they say if they come back today and go into the church and listen? Well, I think they would be disappointed. You think so? Yes, I think so. If they hear the same preaching that I hear. The preaching that I hear is God loves everybody, which, of course, he does. But there's never any emphasis on repentance, except you repent, you must all likewise perish. I don't think they would really appreciate that kind of emphasis. What has happened here then? In other words, the maintenance has been sloppy then over the years. What did it break down? Was it a merger, you think, 1962, 1963? That had a lot to do with it. What would happen now with the ELCA in 1988? Well, like Berge-Strand, he is more hopeful of this merger than the previous one because the ELC was firmer on the word of God than our ELCA. The ELCA was firmer. The Bible was the infallible, inherent word of God that was in their constitution. But what we have adopted now just doesn't say that, same way. So Berge-Strand is more hopeful. But bigger is not always better because you get farther away from the man and the pew. There's the one that's going to be saved, but there seems to be too much administration. It becomes an organization and not an organism. There's a lot of difference between an organism and an organization. There will be a vacuum then. So I just keep on praying. What kind of dialogue do you have with the new people that are coming out? Can you have a dialogue with them? With the new students, the new seminarians? No, I don't. They can't have a dialogue because they are students. I'm afraid it would be like pouring water on the back of a duck. So I don't get involved in that. I've had so much to do with administration. I sat in the president's cabinet in Minneapolis in the Bursell days and went through all that mechanics and I got my belly full of it. So I'm happy to sit in my office and write books and give them to them.