 Cassette 2, side 1, continuation with Hildy Larson, Rockford, Illinois, cassette 2, side 1. I had a fever. We were quarantined. And I couldn't send out a penny or a dime or anything or a slip of paper or anything. The only thing I could do was write on a slip of paper and pin it on a window in the door. For the milkman and for my husband. In the mail, I just reached out the window into the mailbox and got the mail in. And then one morning he had been down Broadway for his breakfast. Came home to go to bed. I went down the basement and we had a coal furnace at that time. And took up the furnace and emptied out the, cleaned it out and filled it up with fresh coal. And all of a sudden I heard thump, thump, thump, not up but in the words that I ran up and got in the bathroom and looked out. Here my husband was laying down on the ground and he got up to the top, he stooped over for to open the window. And it was in the spring. So we had been kind of frosty during the night and so the runners were slick. So he slipped on top, went all the way down and broke the six bottom runners with his feet and got his whole system shook up. Hit the system cover when he got down. So when I got up, looked out, here he was laying down partly on a system cover and on the ground. Then after he crawled from there over to the car in the driveway, crawled in the car and drove down Broadway and found one of the guys that he know that took him to the hospital or doctor, I forgot which it was now. And so they checked him over, must have been to the hospital. And then they brought him home and I had him flat in bed for six weeks and take care of him. He couldn't go to the bathroom and there was no further to the bathroom and from the wall here and over to where you're sitting. Did he have any insurance from the workplace then? Oh yeah, at the work he was. So you didn't have to pay any hospital bills or doctor? Oh, you always had to pay some, you do now too. Sure. You can't get by with everything paid like they do in Sweden. You have to pay some. The government pays so much. Yeah, but at that time I mean. Yeah, they were real good at paying. Did he have insurance where he worked? Huh? Did he have insurance then? Yeah, yeah. And... But he was not paid for being home though? I can't remember how it was. I think it was some that he got some. But anyway, for six weeks he was home. I had him in bed. I had to feed him in bed. I had to give him baths, sponge baths, and change all his clothes on him. He couldn't do anything like that himself. And it was a long six weeks for both of us, all of us. And then after that, I can't remember how long it was after he got back. One day, one of the setup men from another shift, he worked on a second shift, he wanted a cup of coffee. So he told my husband to get him a cup of coffee. So he went over to the coffee machine and got him a cup of coffee and started back. And somebody had spilled coffee on the safety line around the coffee machine. He stepped in that and slipped and fell down and broke ribs on one side. Then I had him later. And then a few months after that, it happened outside going into work in the morning. And he happened to park the car right on the spot where there was ice underneath and snow on top. So he couldn't see the ice. So he got out and he took the coffee bottle out and his lunch bag and coffee bottle on the one arm, the lunch bag under the other and his hands in his pocket and started towards the factory and stepped on that ice close by there. Then he went and on the other side broke ribs. Oh, he was accident prone as they call it. Broke his wrist one time. How during his time at the factory, he was there for over 40 years? 44. 44. Was he with the Union? Yeah. They had a union? A strong union? Yeah. Did he have any problems to start it up in the beginning there? I think they started that in the 30s there sometime. They were real nice to him. So you had a pension then when he died from the union? Yeah. They told him after that, be sure and put my name on so in case something happened to him that I wouldn't be stuck with everything. Oh, they told him that? Yeah. So I get so much a month pension. You still do? Yeah. And they have been real nice to me. And then the social security. Well, I worked after that in 43. I started working and worked from 43 to 65. At National Lock? I worked there some in free sewing for six years and MROC for over 11 years. MROC, the last part when I worked. 11 and a half years at MROC, six at free sewing and three or four over at Lock. Free sewing, what kind of work was that? The sewing machines. Parts for sewing machines. There was no sewing work then? No, no, they just made the parts. Fabricate the, fabrication of the sewing machine. So you've been in a lot of factories then. How about, were you unionized at any one of them? Did you come to a union? They started union at National Lock and they had a time study guy there that was a dirty rotten that couldn't trust them. And you sit there working, he'd go and hide somewhere behind the machine and every time the job you were on and they cut it. If you work it too fast? One day I got in, I had never worked on that job before, all the time I'd been there. And here he came, where he was standing, I don't know. The next day I was notified that I was cut right on the job. Peace work, peace work. And so I told the time study, the setup man, I said, I'm going home at six, I recognized him, I said, I'm going home at six o'clock. Wait a minute, he says. But then he had paper and I had to sign that paper first and he left that for the foreman on his desk. Told him the reason why I went home. I got back the next day, here comes the foreman and I was coming in and checked the time clock and came running, caught me as soon as I got up, I went in to leave our lunch and take our clothes off, the top clothes. And he said, why did you go home last night? I said, why I went home last night? I said, he had no doggone reason for to go and cut the rate on that job. Well, he said, we put it back. I said, he should have left it alone in the first place. I said, nobody could make too much money on that job. He said, we put it back. When he left, then comes the time study guy at home. You had, he said, why did you go home? I said, you know doggone well why I went home. I said, you had no business coming and cut the rate on that job. I said, nobody could make too much money on that. Well, he said, we put it back. I said, you should have left it alone in the first place. Then I was working there another day, sitting there working, here comes the divorcing me. I said, you going to time this job today? No. And I kept up working, still stood there. I said, you want to run it? Oh no. He said, okay. So then I shut the machine off and took the air horse I had in my lap and threw it in the pan of work and got up and went out to the restroom. I got back, he was gone. Then I went over to free sewing and got a job over there. In your opinion now, you can either be paid by hour and do whatever you please or you can have piece work. Which one is the best in the long run? Because if you have a piece work now and they cut you down all the time, it makes you work faster to get up to the same schedule again, but wouldn't that be a... You could make a little bit more if you had a decent job. A lot of times you couldn't make any time. Yeah, but if you have to work too hard now on the piece work, for instance, wouldn't the quality go down though? Because you will be sloppy. Well, some of them did. And they had schedule and schedule of... Rejects. What they, a night shift had shipped, sent out and collected money for doing and halfway is done. Then they brought them over to me. I had to sit and do them over for day rate or hourly rate. That should have been the one that had turned it up in the first place and made good money on it. They should have had to do it for day rate or hourly rate. Because all this piece work now, they will lessen the quality of the product. Not necessary. But if you have a time study man coming and jack you down all the time, you still like to make more money, so you got to work faster and you will be a little bit sloppy then? No, I did the work the way it was supposed to be done regardless. But he cut you down? Yeah. He thought you made too much money? So that's the reason why I left there and went over to the free zone. So you left? Yeah. Did you get any pension benefit from there? No. No? No. Why? They didn't have a union there. There was no union. How about Amrock? Was there a union there? I don't think there was when I was there. That's why I had to do all that work to sit and work over after somebody else had done at Amrock. But we had profit sharing there, which was nice. At Amrock? Yeah. And so you could decide what you wanted to save, so either from 1 to 5 percent first. I started in 54. Or from—then they raised it, but a year after, and you could—from 1 to 10 percent. So then I took from 1 to 10. So when I left there, I had got my check, what I had saved at that time. So I told my husband, because we had bought a house then in 58, so I told him, now we're going to go out to Freeport and pay off the mortgage. We had about half of the mortgage left. We got out then, and there was some other—so I said, if I give you this check now, and you can borrow that out to somebody else, isn't that just as good as if we keep it? So the president said, okay. So then he took the check, and it was paid off. What year did you start to look for your own house? They were building homes then out in Rolling Green, what they call it, a new subdivision of Rafferty at that time. That was after the Second World War, though? Oh yeah, that was in 58. So you rented then all the way up to— Up to that time, yeah. You rented? Why didn't you look for a house earlier? Didn't you want to pay into debt? We couldn't afford it when the kids were home, when the kids were small and home. There was no way? No. You couldn't go to the bank and say, I'd like to borrow $2,000, and say— It wasn't that easy those days to borrow. And the trouble he had had, we didn't know if we were going to be able to pay it off. But then when I was working there, too, I started in 43. Yes. And helped. Then we had two paychecks. So when he couldn't work, I was able to work and we could pay the rent and for our grocery and everything. We didn't have to owe everybody money. So one little check could go into the bank then for saving? Yeah. Almost. Well, whatever. You had a car at that time, though? Yeah. He had a car when I met him the first time. So when you look for a house now, what did you look for? Did you have any specific needs that you'd like to fill? We were alone, the two of us then. We were just alone, the two of us. The children had all left. My son was in the Air Force. Oh, I see. So they were all alone. And the girls were all married. So you were looking for a smaller house then? Yeah, we had a two-bedroom home. What did you look for now in the house? Was it a new one you built? It was brand new. There wasn't ready yet. Did you tell the contractor you wanted a closet here or a different one? That was already done at the time we bought it. So you couldn't make any choices? We couldn't tell them anything. And they never finished what they didn't do outside. We had to do that ourselves. There was no driveway, no garage. And the lawn in back was coming from a hill of the second house from there. And so they were sloping down. So we had to fill that, even that up. We had to get a lot of fill dirt. And under the garage, a lot of sand and fill dirt put in. So you finished it off yourself then? Yeah. You could get a little bit more or a better price on it? Well, I don't know. I don't think I got that much more. The kids, they bought it for me at the time. They sold it. They were there a year and a half only. And they sold it for, I got 36,000, I think it was. But then there was things I had extra to do and pay for them. And now they sold it for 41,000. Only cut the hedge there once. You're talking about kids, that was your kids? No. One of the board of directors on the home here from Love's Park. They made a kidding on it then? Yeah, they made good on it. And we put corrugated siding on it. That's not supposed to be painted. And they go and paint the corrugated siding Peet's color. A little more Peet's than walls here outside. And then the windows, painted them green, the woodwork on the windows. In the front of it. So how does it look? I didn't like it and it's going to look horrible when snow and ice and rain and that get on the siding. They can't scrape it. But that's not your worry anymore? No, no. I painted it before. Just before we had the corrugated siding put on. Because my sister carried on so terrible about that I was out painting on the house. My husband was going to hire a fellows to do it, so I told him why. I said, you know I love to paint. I said, if you just stick around and help me move the ladder, I'll do it. So you were pretty handy with stuff like that. I painted inside all the time and I painted the outside, the whole house and the garage. You were paper hanging too? Oh yeah. I used to help my mother with that home in Sweden. So that was something you learned. I used to go and help my daughters with that years ago. Dirt places. How about your children now? Did they go through high school or other? Oh yeah. Did they go through college? No. They started working after high school. And two of them worked in banks to begin with and the youngest one worked at Clark's manufacturing out on Kiss Walk in Harrison. How about your daughters? You know you've got three girls. When they were ready to date in high school, did you tell them that they should watch out for the fellows they dated? Why naturally. I had no trouble with them. No trouble? But you warned them about going with Italians. Or Irish. Or Catholics. Oh yeah. They usually... You didn't have that trouble the one you came? No. Because you dated only Swedes I suppose. Yes. And most of your time period friends too did the same thing. But then later on they started to go out with Italians and Irish and Polacks, Lithuanians. How did the mothers react to that? Well I don't know because mine didn't do that. They were born here all the fellows that they married. They were all born here. Were they of a Swedish background? Two of them were farmers. One up in Chopera. And his name is Ludwig. And... So they are non-Swedes then? No. None of the... My son married her folks were Swedish. Born here. Born here. And the girls married non-Swedes? Yeah. Oh. Did they continue to go to the Zion Lutheran Church? No, they never went there. They never went there? They were not confirmed there either? No, they were Salem Lutheran. Oh I see. So they were closer than where you lived? Where we lived, yeah. And I didn't go to Zion then either. I joined Salem. But now I'm still a member over there. But I told them to take me off because I can't get there. But I go up to the first assembly up here. And Pastor Lovell at Salem, he said, oh it's alright. He said, after all we work for the same thing. Oh. Do they have the same kind of presentation of the gospel, the first assembly at the Salem church? No, no, that's different. It's different? Oh yeah. But it doesn't bother you in any way? No. There's no tradition, it's broken? No. As long as you have a church and... Yeah. And up here they got a van, they come down and get us in the morning and bring us back home when we're through. But then you also attend Hemförbundets möten på Frälsningsarmenet. Yeah. Why did you... I've done that for years. We went there and worked for many years and tied quilts. For Salvation Army? Mm-hmm. That they could sell. Now since I had the surgery, I haven't been there and one of the other ladies hasn't been there because she's in a nursing home now and she's got cancer. And that's all in Swedish, the Hemförbundet? Yeah. And there's about 20, 25 left of the old timers? There isn't so many that come there now, but ever so often... Oh yeah, there's quite a few to have. But you attend those meetings every month? When I can, there was for a while I couldn't right after surgery. So you go to church every Sunday now at the First Assembly? Up here, yeah. Up here? Not last Sunday because we had a lot of birthdays out in Love's Park. But you can't walk there, or they pick you up? They come and pick us up. So they have service? Yeah. Salem, they don't have that kind of service? Up here they got three services every Sunday morning and one at night. And Salem, they have two in the morning in the Sunday school class. And up here they got three services every morning in Sunday school classes. Like Pastor Ron, he's a very good preacher. But it is different than the nutrients? Yeah, it is. But they probably have changed too though over the years. Well, so... It's not the same as it was when you came in the 1920s. No, I imagine not. I haven't been there now for years, so I don't know. Everything changes. And we have changed with it. Yeah. End of interview.