 Carlson. I mean, he changed his name to Carlson, see? It was Johnson in Sweden. But he was the son of Carl Johnson, Carl Gustav Johnson. So he changed it. So your mother took that name too then, Carlson? Yeah, when she came with her folks. They didn't come until 1895. 1895. This is Leona Eckblad in Maudine, Illinois. She was born 1908, the 29th of March, in Rock Island, Illinois. And we have 14th of April, 1986. So your father and I, if we start with him, Emil L. Peterson, he came with his parents, rather. He was conceived in Sweden, he said, but delivered in the United States, in Rock Island, Illinois. So his parents now, your grandparents, did you meet them or were they dead before? Grandma Peterson was dead, but Grandpa, he lived to be 90 years old. And he worked at Weyerhaeuser Dinkmann. And he came from, well, they came from Lundsberg Parish near, I was there last, in 1982. In Småland? No, in Värmland. Oh, in Värmland? Mm-hmm. Grandpa Peterson was born in Värmland. I see. So you remember one of the… Yeah, Grandma died when she was quite young, but Grandpa lived to be 90 years old. Well, you remember her. Did she talk Swedish only at that time or did she speak English? Grandpa, you mean? Your grandma. Grandpa. Grandpa. Yes. Well, I could talk to him a little bit and he understood English because he worked for quite a few years, you know. And now he spoke English. So he had a hang of it. But he also talked Swedish, I suppose. Oh, surely. Did you grow up with any Swedish in the home? We didn't talk much Swedish in our home. You didn't? Mm-mm. Oh. So your parents… That's why I didn't learn too much Swedish, you know, before. I went with the Augustana group in 1982, the Bohuslän. So both your parents, your father, he was born here in Rakaiden. And your mother, she came 1895 and she was very young too then. So she went to school here. Well, no. That's the trouble. Nobody wanted to take her because she was almost 15 years old and they didn't know where to really start her in school because she couldn't talk English. Oh, I see. So she didn't go to any school then? No. But her younger brother, he was 10 years old and he got to go to school, of course. So how did it affect her then, later on in life? What kind of work did she… Well, she did domestic work until she was married when she was, well, I think she was 22 or 23 years old. When she married your father? Uh-huh. And then after that she didn't work? She stayed at home? No, she didn't. We had two daughters. They had two daughters. Two daughters. And your uncle, now that was 10 years old when he came, what did he do? You mean my husband? No, not your husband, but your uncle, your mother's brother. He was 10 years old. Oh, yes. And he was only 10 and he got to go to school, of course. He went to school. Oh, sure. And what kind of work did he get then? He worked at John Deere. So he started there as a young boy then? Yes, my uncle that came first, Gus Carlson, he got a job at John Deere and he was head of the department, I believe it was called the Wagon Works or something like that, at John Deere. And when Uncle Gus retired, he stayed there 50 years, they asked him who he would recommend to take his place because he was head of the department. And he said, well, my brother is the best worker here and I would recommend him. So he got his job. So he continued right in his first step? Uh-huh. And was he too old then to continue or why did he step down? Well, Uncle Gus, you mean the one, the first one that came? Well, he had worked at John Deere for 50 years. 50 years, so he retired then. Oh, he had retired then. I mean, that was when he retired. They asked him who he recommended for the department head and he said he's his younger brother. So he worked there for 50 years? Yes, he worked. And then Uncle Carl, his name was Carl, he worked there until he retired. So and that was the only employment they had then, they didn't work anywhere else? No. And my own father was a Gershwin. Yes, and he started, he went to school there of course because he was born there. Yes, he did. And he went to Augustana Business College and then he and his brother decided to go into the grocery business together. They had Peterson Brothers Grocery Store from 1902 to 19, Daddy died in 39 and Uncle Alfred kept the store until about 45. So they stayed in the same, in the family. So did he, how did he get his training to be a grocer man? Well, I think he started working in the mills, they called it the old mill store, something down, way down on the other end of Rock Island, 4th Street, well no, it was about 1st or 2nd Street. Oh, right downtown then? Way down towards the river, near Weyerheiser Denkman Place. Oh, that was down there? And he worked there for a while and then they decided that that's what he wanted to do. So they started a complete new store then on their own? Yeah. So they didn't buy any used one? I think the store was there as a furniture store and then they bought it and turned it into a grocery store as I remember. So then he had to employ clerks and... Yeah, they had another brother that worked for him, Adolph Peterson, Uncle Alfred and Uncle Adolph. Alfred was in business with my dad and Uncle Adolph worked for them. And then they had a delivery boy. So he went around then in the neighborhood to take up orders? Yeah. And then they delivered? Yeah, he'd go on one day and go up, way up to 38th Street and 44th Street he had business way up there with a lot of the Swedish people and professors at Augustana College and he would go there on say Monday and deliver the groceries on Wednesday. I see, they took the orders one day. And he had a horse and buggy, not a buggy but a wagon I mean, horse and wagon. So when he took the orders did he use the horse and wagon? Oh yes. And sometimes he'd get stuck on 38th Street mud, 7th Avenue. Was that paid? No, I don't think so. The way I heard it wasn't paid. Do you remember that it was paid when you were growing up? I remember the wagon and the horse but I don't remember anything else about it. You know what I mean? How the streets looked like or anything? No, I really don't. So 38th Street hill there, it was a bad one? Yeah, it was pretty mud I think. They got the streetcar in there of course. And then of course they took the streetcar out. And I worked at the Book Concern for 12 years and the last month I worked there I got married in June of 1940. And I think they were repaving the street so we had a detour on 38th Street. So that was the second time I suppose it got redone. But that was the way the business was done then, taking up orders one day. Oh yes. And he did it himself, your father? My dad was... So he met a lot of Swedes then? Oh yes. He could talk Swedish then? Yes he could. And he was very proud to be a Swede. He just loved Sweden. He never saw Sweden but he would have loved to have gone I'm sure. Did he push down you that you should be Swedish? No, not particularly. My mother who came from there was not very much enthused about Sweden. Oh, so she had a different idea. I don't know why but I suppose they felt like when they came to America they should be Americans. Or English or whatever. But your father not born here, he was more different. Yes, because he was brought up more with the Swedish influence. His mother and father I suppose talked Swedish all the time when they were young because that's the only language they knew. They didn't have school for teaching English at that time. But your mother's parents, they were Swedish. Why didn't they... They thought they were going to be Americans. I think of course my mother had heard so much about... You see the rest of the family had all gone. There were three girls and one boy had come to America early and they just thought that I suppose that's where they should go. Grandpa didn't want to come to America. He was a contractor or a builder and financially I suppose he didn't really want to come. I mean he didn't have to come. But Grandma wanted to see her mother and father were already in America. They came in 1870 I think it was. They called them the Bowmans. And B-O-H-M-A-N. They come from Bukhara. And we used to have a family reunion at least every other year. But some of the older people have died. You are not related to this Bowman. They were pastors. They lived on in Aledo? No. Oscar Bowman was... He was a pastor in the Augustana Lutheran Church. That was my mother's cousin. They all came and we used to celebrate as like 1870 when I guess the grandparents came over first. So but didn't they live on Aledo or New Windsor? No, no, no. Not that Bowman. Uh uh. They came to Moline. There's quite a few of them. And one became a pastor? Oscar Bowman. He was the son of the first ones that came. So you had met them occasionally? Oh yes. We used to be together quite a bit. And how was he related to your mother? He was the cousin. My grandmother and his... wait a minute now. His father. Yeah. His father was a Bowman. My grandmother was a Christine Bowman. Christine. So that's how they met. That's how they were. So your mother, did she have a store too? Any grocery store? Your mother? No. She never worked in the store. The store was a complete line of grocery. They could buy anything from staples of any kind for the... They didn't have meat except boiled ham and things like that. And my dad used to soak stockfish. For Christmas? Thousands of pounds I was going to say I'm sure. And he even sent it to California one year. One of his customers wanted him to send it to his daughter in California. Was it soaked already then? Yes. Yes it was. I don't know how they got it there. It came through all right. I don't know if they had any dry ice in those days or not. So all the way to California? Yeah. That's right. So he had the whole line then of Swedish foods like lingonberries. Yeah. Yeah. And the lutefisk. Oh yeah. And herring. And I remember that. Came in a barrel. A big wooden barrel. I think the lingonberry did too in those days. Some kind of a barrel. So you were brought up then on lutefisk, lingonberries and herring. Oh sure. And you all liked it? Yeah. I guess we didn't have it too much but we did have it a couple times. Stockfish at least. Yes. And Daddy had that stockfish and Grandpa used to come. You know it was just like a big board you know. And then Grandpa used to come down and cut it up for him. Just for something to do of course. So Grandpa, he lived close by then? Yeah. He lived over on 4th Street. Not too far from Weyerheiser and Denkman. But he didn't work there. He just used to come over. I remember they used to say that Grandpa came over and cut up the stockfish. So that was his... That was just something for him to do. To do when he was older. Yeah. So your mother had, saw him for a long time then. He was high age when he died, 90. My dad died when he was 69 and Mother died when she was 77. So when I was married she didn't live with me at first but then she came over and we were going to fix her house up and make it into a duplex but the carpenter said it was during the war and he said it was too much trouble to get the materials. So she stayed at our house and she lived there for 18 years. I see. And she never went back to Sweden for a visit? No. She didn't care about it? No. She didn't talk much about it? Well, I know she went to school there and was confirmed there. I think it was right after her confirmation that they came to America. Now Grandma wanted to come and visit her family because they were all here. Grandpa's family were still in Sweden and he didn't want to come to America. He was homesick then? Yeah. Did he mention that at any time that he wanted to go back? He didn't really want to come at all and Grandma said well, she was going to go to America because she wanted to visit her parents and her other children. But Grandpa came along much to his Reluctantly? Reluctantly. And he was a contractor and he broke his arm when he came to America. He hadn't been here very long when he broke his arm and the doctor said it wrong. So he never could really So he didn't like America too much? He didn't really like America too well. Everything was going against him? He lived to be 75. I think he was 50 when he came. So what was he doing then? Your father's parents, he worked at a bank. But Mother's parents, neither one of them really worked after they got here because well I'm sure that he worked as a contractor, a carpenter and did as much as he could but the doctor set his right hand wrong. So he couldn't get any grip? So then they bought a weaving machine and he did a lot of rug weaving. At home? At home. So he got good at that? Yeah. And how did they sell those rugs though? I don't know. I really don't remember that. I remember Grandma getting those balls ready for you know The yarn. The yarn or the material. And I really don't know how she got the material. But maybe people that were you know giving things away or throwing things away. She must have made, because I remember there were a lot of rugs but and they did that for quite a long time. They don't have any of those rugs left? Uh-uh. They're all gone? Uh-uh. So how did he do now with insurance then if he broke his arm and had to go to the doctor? Well they decided they were going to sue the doctor but the doctors got together and they stuck together and they didn't, the case was lost. In those days, it is now. It's different today. It's different today now. So he didn't get one penny then from them? And they happened in Rock Island or Moline? Moline. Moline. Fifth Avenue and First Street they lived until they both passed away. So he had a pretty rough time then in his new country. I didn't realize if it was rough or not. I don't think it was. Because he was young. Yeah, he was young and as I say financially I don't think he really had to come. And they must have had some money because they lived for 25 years after that. And so he must have done something. I don't remember what of course, if he really worked as a carpenter anymore or not. I think he did but not too much. Now they bought the house on Fifth Avenue and First Street when they first came to America and it was small so they remodeled it. And the one sister of my mother, she was married to a carpenter and so he and Grandpa made the house over. And it's still standing there and it looks just as nice as it can be. It's on Fifth Avenue and First Street. It's a house that sits way back in the yard. And what church did they belong to? First Lutheran? First Lutheran Moline. My mother's parents. And my father was a charter member of the First Lutheran Church in Rock Island. And my mother and father met at choir practice. My aunt was working in Rock Island and my mother came to visit her and so they went to choir practice together and that's where she met my dad. So they were married, the first Moline pastor, Reverend Hemborg, but they came to Rock Island to live. And of course then they joined First Rock Island. I mean, my dad belonged there of course. But they joined, my mother became a member of the Rock Island Church. And when I got married, I belonged to Rock Island First Lutheran and came back and joined First Moline. So we just crisscrossed. So your husband and he belonged to? First Moline. Their folks came from Sandwich, Illinois. When Carl came to Augustana College. So he was born in Sandwich? No, he was born in North Shipping, Sweden. North Shipping, yeah that's right. So who was it now that was born in Sandwich? Nobody. Well, I think it was Florence Eckblad, the younger sister was born. And Lillian was born in, I think she was born in Sandwich, but Florence was born in Plano, I think, Illinois. And they moved to Sandwich. So your husband's family, they also came over then with the… Oh yeah, I told you that they came over in 1905, I think it was. So how many were they then that left? Carrie's the only one that's left. No, Lillian is here too. Lillian Keltz, K-O-E-L-Z. Her husband's Henry Keltz. And she was born in… And then Carl and Eckblad. Carrie Eckblad. She never married. No, she never married and she lives in Rock Island in Walker Court. So and then the whole family came on to Moline or Rock Island? Yeah, they came to Moline. And Carrie and Carl went to Augustana College and then they had already moved from Sandwich to Moline. And then Florence, their other sister, younger sister, she came and she graduated from Augustana College. And Lillian went there, I think she went through her junior year and then she got married. So did they take business courses then at Augustana or… Who? Your husband and… Oh no, they graduated from… He was a chemistry teacher, you know. Oh, I see. And he got his Master's of Science in Boulder, Colorado. And he got a Master of Education at Iowa University. That was after he was married, or… No, that was before he was married. Oh, I see. So he was full-fledged academic educator. Yeah, oh yes. He taught chemistry for 43 years in Moline school system. Oh, I see. So how did you meet then? You were working on a book concern for 12 years. Well, I had a girlfriend. Her husband was studying for his Master's too in University of Illinois. Yes. And I had just broken up with the fellow I was engaged to. And so she asked me… You were engaged to… To another fellow. I see. And so she says, well, why don't you come along and go to Champaign with me? I got to write some, type some on her husband's thesis. So I had nothing better to do, so I went with her. And that's how I met Carl. He was working on his Master's too, I guess it was. And you never met before? No, but I had double dated with his sister at Augustana College. See, I went to Augustana too. I see. So that's… That's the way. Oh, you were pets. And of course I had a carriac blood for a typing teacher when I was in high school. So she became a teacher? Oh, she was a teacher, yeah, for 40 or 50 years. Sure. In Rock Island? Rock Island. She was in Rock Island High School and Carl was in Moline. Yeah, so… So when you met him, then he worked on his Master's, you said? Well I think he was really working on his Doctor's because he had his Master's degree by that time. But of course the war came and kind of squelched that. And then we had a little girl. Oh, you married though in 1940? Yeah. So when did he go to Colorado for studies? Well, I really don't know for sure. I guess he, between 19, I'd say between 1930 and 1940 he went to Colorado. And then on the weekends, a bunch of them would go to Iowa City and go to the university there and that's how he got his Master's degree in science. How could he swing the tuitions and the cost now of going to school? He didn't work then during the Depression? No, not in the summertime. Of course he went to the University of Colorado in the summertime. He worked here, I mean he was a teacher here. Then he worked up there. So he saved up enough money to be able to travel and go to school? Yeah, that's right. And during the Depression, you worked at Book Concern? Yeah, I went to Augustana College and I got a diploma in voice and probably school music. In those days it was only a two-year course. And if you remember 1929 to 1930, it was the Depression years too. And so it was almost impossible to get a job. But then I got a job in the office at the Book Concern during the summertime and I liked it so well that I just stayed there. I never did apply again for a job, for a public school music job. Oh, I see. Because then the war was, I mean it was the Depression years and it was just impossible to, they didn't want to hire anybody in just music because it was something they didn't have to have, I suppose. So I just stayed at the Book Concern and I worked in the office. So the culture went by the wayside? Well, more or less. I've never regretted it though because I belonged to a sorority at Augustana College and I had my best friends there. And I'm sure that's maybe why I met Carl too. Lucky break. Yeah. So you got engaged then and married in 1940? Mm-hmm. And you married in the first Lutheran? Yeah. We met in 1939, the summer of 39. We got married in the summer of 40. Was there Pastor Tilburg or? Reverend, no, no. Tilburg was at Trinity. Oh, he was at Trinity. Oh, yeah. Reverend William Berg was pastor. William Berg. Yeah. He was. So you moved to Moline then or did you stay in Rock Island? Moved to Moline. And Carrie Eckblad and her folks bought, they had a house built in Walker Court. At that time it was just being developed. You know where Walker Court is? Oh, yes. It's top of Friendship Manor or? Well, no, that's the high rise. Yes, but it's not too far away. Well, it's not too far away. It's east of it. Yeah. We're at the playground in Longview Park. You go that street one block that way and one block that way and another block the other way. It's not easy to find. Dorothy Peterson lives there. Well, she still lives next to Carrie. Dorothy Peterson taught dramatics or English at Rock Island High School. Dramatics more or less. So it's a teacher's street then? Yes, it was. Yeah, it certainly was. And it was constructed in the 1940s or? Yes. They started building the house in 19, right after Decoration Day. And they moved in September the 24th, that same year, 1940. And then we were gone quite a long time on our honeymoon. And so then we stayed with my mother for a few months when the house was being done in Rock Island. And then we moved to the big house on 13th Street. 2318, 13th Street. And I lived there for 30 years. Carl died when, well, I lived there longer than that, I guess. But he died in 1969. So you went on a honeymoon then? Did you go by train or? Oh, no. We went by car. By car. And we went way out to Portland, Oregon, Black Hills. It was before the war started? Yeah. Yeah. So you were able to get gas then? Oh, yeah. Uh-huh. How did you stay then? Because there were no motels at that time. Did you stay in the hotel? Oh, yes. There were motels. Off in the country? Yeah. We stayed at Black Hills. I mean, that was, I don't know what they call them, but I guess it was a cottage or something. And we went to Yellowstone. They had a cottage there. It was cold. And the bears were coming to eat people's food out of their trunk of their car. They didn't hurry up and shut it. I remember somebody says, oh, our bacon is gone. And of course, we saw Old Faithful. And then we went on to, up to Portland, Oregon, down the coast to San Francisco. Did you visit some friends or relations? Yeah. In San Francisco, we had my sister-in-law's, well, my brother-in-law's brother and wife were living in San Francisco. So we were there for just for a meal. But we stayed at a motel. Or not a motel. I don't know what they called them. I guess it was a motel. Anyway, we had a very nice place there. And we stayed there a few days. And then we went down the coast to San Francisco. We were in San Francisco, that's right. And then we went to, oh, we stayed in Las Vegas one night too. And we had trouble with our car. And, but then we went on to Denver, Colorado. And he had a friend there that we visited. We didn't stay there, though. We stayed in a motel. So how could he afford this extensive trip now? Because he hadn't started to work really, your husband? Oh, yes. He'd been working. He'd been working since 19, well, he started teaching in Moline High School, 24. Oh, I see. In continuation with the New England A-Plan, Moline, Illinois, so I too. Yes, but still the wages were not that high either. No, I should say that. No, it was hard to work. So then you came back and then he continued in the teacher. Yes, he taught chemistry. He was head of the department in Moline High School for all those years. After he, well, he taught, during the war, he taught calculus and a few other things. I can't remember what it was. He said when he first started teaching, he had to, he taught algebra. So he was mathematic. Mathematics, yes. Then he, see, then the community college in Moline started. Then he was one of the first teachers there. There were eight of them, I think, at first. Is this the beginning of the Blackhawk College? Mm-hmm. I try. Then he taught there and then it started to be Blackhawk College. Then he taught at Blackhawk College the rest of his years. The beginning of Blackhawk College, somebody told me that the Belgian people started that. Is that correct? Belgian. People. Because there's a lot of Belgians, you know, in Moline. Not that I know of, uh-uh. So they were not instrumental of- No, I never heard that. It was the whole community. The whole community, sure. Mr. Beeling was sort of instrumental in getting community college, I think. You know, Mr. Beeling, Beeling? Yeah, Beeling. But isn't he of Belgian descent? Beeling wasn't Belgian, I don't think. No. I don't think so. He might be in English, but no, I don't think so. Maybe German, I don't know. But I don't think he was Belgian. So that was the beginning, it was a community college. Yeah, mm-hmm. And he taught there until he retired in 1963. And then there was Blackhawk? Oh, yes. It was before they moved. Of course, he helped plan the chemistry department in the new- What was the name at first? The community college? What was their buildings? They kept on with the Moline High School. That was all- Blackhawk College was in Moline, in the high school, all those years. They used the same- Oh, yes. And there was commuting students from the beginning. It was more or less, I think, around here more. I mean, I don't think too many people commuted when it was at the old building in Moline High School. But it served its purpose, that's for sure. Yeah, and then they- So the people that couldn't afford them to go to Augustana, for instance, or St. Lawrence and other colleges, Marycrest, they went to the community college? I think so. Well, a lot of the boys, they said when they came out of the service, you know, that's when community college started. And then after that, well, they started- they decided to change the name to Blackhawk, and that's- it's been going, you know, bigger and bigger. So I see this beautiful silver trader in the cabinet. It says Carl E. Eckblad. When did he get- Oh, I can't move. It says, to Professor Carl E. Eckblad, for 43 years of outstanding service. In the teaching profession from the Blackhawk College faculty and staff, May 1983- Oh, 63. 63. It's May 1963. Mm-hmm. That's when he officially retired. That's right. In June. Mm-hmm. I had a retirement party. He had been a teacher for many, many years. 43 years. He taught one year at Carthage College, or Academy, really, when he got out of Augustana College. But then he went on and did some more graduate work in chemistry, and then he got his job in- What was the name of the college you said he started? Carthage. What is that? Oh, Carthage. Carthage. Yeah, this down south. It was down south in Illinois. And he was a teacher for a long time. Oh, I see. Yeah. And he was a teacher for a long time. But now it's in Wisconsin. There were the Mormons had their- That's right. Mm-hmm. So he was gone after a while. Mm-hmm. Just a year, I think, and he decided he was going to go on, and he went to University of Illinois the next year. And when you married, you never worked after that then? Well, I was called back to the book concern for five years, and we didn't have any children for five years. And so I worked there off and on just to help them out for five years, but- Oh. So you worked with Bertie Swanson and Gus Magnuson and- Clark Swanson was my boss. Oh. And I was secretary for him for- So you worked in the office then? Oh, yes. Mm-hmm. I see. Yeah. He was cashier, and he headed the- really, the employment too, you know. He paid all that. Mm-hmm. So in those days, we had a lot of Augustana Lutheran pastors, of course, that would- were our best customers, of course. The seminary. In the seminary, of course. Mm-hmm. It was a lot different than it is now. Yeah, it's more quiet now, I think, compared to- well, there's more students now. Yeah. There was a bigger grip about the whole nation, you know. Oh, yes. I should say- From coast to coast. Mm-hmm. A lot of printing was done, I understand. Yeah, I should say so. If we go back to the household now, where you were growing up, if you remember Christmas- Yes. Did your father take care of the Christmas tree to get into the house, and how long before Christmas did he- Well, we had a little artificial tree, I remember that, at first. Oh, I see. And of course- The one you sat on the table. Huh? The one you had on the table, or- No, it was a bigger one. It was pretty big. I think, you know, it was pretty big. And of course, my uncle Alfred and my uncle- we had another uncle, Fred. He worked at- where Casey is now. Casey- what was there before? International Harvester? No. Well, that'd be- I don't know. Anyway, he worked down there at that. And then Uncle Alfred and Uncle Adolph. But Christmas Eve, of course, we always used to spend with my mother's sisters and family up in Moline. Oh, Christmas Eve? Mm-hmm. Was there a night that you received the Christmas presents, then? Mm-hmm. More or less from my relatives there. Then we'd come home, and my dad had to work on Christmas Eve until six or seven o'clock. It was the busiest day of the year. Yes. And he never could get off. So we'd come home, and then we would have Christmas gifts with him. The same evening? In the evening, uh-huh. And then on Christmas Day, of course, we always went to church, whatever hour it was, 5.30, 6.30 in the morning. And I remember my dad was at the yearly meeting of the church, and he said, well, he would rather have it, because it was quite a question whether they should have it at midnight or in the morning. So he said, well, he would rather have it at midnight when he was still up, you know, instead of trying to get up early in the morning. So it was eventually, it was put up at midnight, 11.30 or so, whatever it was. So who dressed at Christmas Day, your mother or? Well, on Christmas Eve afternoon, my sister and I and my mother, we got the tree all decorated, but we always used to wait for Christmas Eve day. You didn't do it ahead of time then? No. But of course, nowadays, we start on December 1st, I think. And so, yeah. So your sister, was she older than you? Yes, she was three years older than I. Oh, I see. She's passed away. What did you dress the tree with now, different ornaments? Oh, yeah, we had a lot of ornaments. I still have some of them. Can't throw them away, you know. Were they handmade or were they bought in the store? Well, a lot of them were bought in the store, but my mother used to make those little things that they make in Sweden, I'm sure, crisscross things that, you know, and she made pop things, you know, and we hung them on the tree. Any flags? I can't remember any flags. I know my friend, Margaret Swanson, has a lot of flags on her tree. You know Margaret Swanson, don't you? She's one of my best friends. So, but you don't remember if you had any on your tree. You had light candles, though. Oh, yes. One Christmas, my grandfather and my bachelor uncles and, well, the other one, too, my mother's– my other uncle was married, and he and his wife were there, too, and on Christmas Day, we always had all dad's family, and the boys used to smoke cigars. The boys? The boys, my uncles. Oh, I see. How old were they then when they smoked cigars? Well, I don't know. Between 40s? Yeah, between 30 and 40, I suppose. Because young boys didn't smoke? No, they were men, of course. They were in the grocery store, you know, and they had cigars, or two, of course, and so then one of them got to– they had the Christmas tree lit, I guess, or the candles on the tree. Oh, I know. Yes, it was lit, but I guess they thought it was getting awfully smoky in the room, so they opened the window, and Mother's nice, beautiful new curtains, one of them went up in smoke and scorched our piano. So I remember that day, and also some of my playthings under the tree. I had a little doll bed and the doll. So I bet your mother didn't approve of the cigar smoking. Oh, they were very sorry about that, of course, especially about her curtain. So there was always like a custom that they could light up a cigar in any house. Oh, sure. They didn't ask for any– Permission. Permission. Oh, no. It was just the way it was. My dad, they smoked. They smoked. My grandfather lived to be nine years old, and I'm telling you this house was full of smoke. Two bachelor uncles and my grandfather. I used to go down there. But the ladies, no, they didn't smoke. Oh, goodness, no. But didn't they offend you? I mean, with all the smoke all over in the curtains and draperies and– Yes, it was offensive. But we didn't talk about it. Because everybody did? Yeah, sure. The older men all smoked. I mean, I never even thought anything about it. Now I can't stand it. They didn't use any cigarettes? They smoked cigars. Cigars. Big, heavy– Uncle Adolph, he smoked a pipe. And we were down there on Thanksgiving Day. They didn't have any children, but we always were on Thanksgiving Day at Uncle Adolph and Aunt Gusty's house. And, oh, that pipe smelled. Pipes smelled pretty good in those days, I thought. It's got– They had different flavors, didn't they? Yeah. I don't know, but he was the only one that smoked a pipe. The rest of them smoked cigars. How about– Grandpa and my dad. Three of them. Snuff-eating? No. You didn't see any– No, nobody chewed snuff that I know of. Chewed snuff that I know of in my family. I was in Sweden and I saw somebody chewing snuff there and I thought it was terrible. It's coming back to you. That was in 1982. I won't tell you who it was either. They say that's the hockey players, you know, and the– Oh, the baseball players, I guess. They chew tobacco. That's what– I mean, well, no, but this fellow, she was chewing snuff, you know. I don't know which one it was. I think it was snuff, though. They ate snuff. So when did women start not to use cigarettes? Do you remember? You never smoked cigarettes. No, I never did. Was it after the war, you think? The advertisement came out in the paper, you know, it should be– Yeah, must have been. I never had friends that smoked. So our sorority girls at Augustana never smoked. And– Yeah. It was probably in the 50s. But I remember the fellow that I went with smoked Lucky Strikes. And that was the strongest thing– I think that was the strongest cigarette that has ever been made, isn't it? Lucky Strikes. I have no idea because I– Anyway, he died of a rare disease. I don't know if it was because of smoking or what, but– But anyway– It was the one you broke up with. And how about your home now later on when you and your husband had a family you took in the Christmas tree? Was that dressed according to the Swedish custom or– And the table you set for Christmas, you had head sheets? Well, we had– Oh, yeah. Oh, we had– Well, we had batatis cor. And hair– And not– Yes, we had– We used to go to Grandma Eklad's and Carrie's house for Christmas Eve. And they always fixed stockfish and rice pudding and things like that. You know, the Swedish stuff. And then after Grandma died, then we used to have sort of potluck. And then we used to bring a lot of things, you know, to– Then we used to take turns in the Eklad family. So your mother then taught you to prepare the stockfish and– Oh, yeah. And the– And the– Yeah. Yeah, but this– You know, I was so surprised when I was in Sweden in 1982. I couldn't find any place– We went down to a butcher shop in Grevestad, and they didn't have any batatis cor, and they didn't have any– And it was very– We didn't have rice pudding like we do here. You know, when I go to a smörgåsbord, or something, I always bring rice pudding. You didn't find it at any place in Sweden? I didn't see it in Sweden. They had a lot of– They had lots of casserole that had some kind of fish in it. I guess it was– Jonsson's restlse? I don't know. It was something– They had a lot of potatoes. So this is a newer dish. Yeah. It was never used, you see, by the– Yes. By the Americans. So there was all new diet food when you came over there. I never– Snapshooting, no-discus pudding. We had quite experience when we got to Stockholm. You see, I was with the Augustana group. You went for a summer course, as well. Yeah. And we were there five weeks in Grevestad. And then we went to Stockholm for one week. Well, I shouldn't say it, but I've never seen so many drunk people in my life. So that was a surprise for you. That was the first time then? First time for me. I've never been to Sweden before. You see, then, when I was there, when I got to Grevestad, my dad's family were having– They have a family reunion every two years. So I knew it was 1982 was supposed to be the year. But I hadn't heard from them. But they had decided, I guess, at the last minute, to have one. So I got a letter when I got to Grevestad saying to come to– Where was I going? I went to Kristianhamn? Kristianhamn. Yeah, in Värmland. In Värmland. I took three trains to get to Kristianhamn. And then we had relatives from Stockholm that were in the same hotel. And I registered in there. And then they came and looked me up. And we went out to dinner that night. And we went to a beautiful restaurant. And we were the only people in the restaurant. It was a Saturday night. I guess people in Sweden don't go out for food like we do. It was empty then? Yeah, just about. It was a real nice restaurant. We stayed there overnight, and then we went to– We went to– Mm. Storfors. Storfors in Värmland. And Lily and Carl Erik Holmqvist, they called the place Rödnäs– That says farmer, I guess. That means farmer. And they lived there. They didn't live too far from these people, but– Rudnäs i Kristianhamn. And Carl Olof Olibrigida Olsson, Nordvestigatorn. Nordshipping, Sweden. That was the cousins, some cousins. They could talk English. And he was a dental– He wasn't a dentist, but he was a dental technician, and she taught school. So I had a lot of people that were well-educated as far as– This is the people that were at this reunion that I went to. Margareta Hägglund, and she lived in Tobi, Sweden. Lived in Stockholm, Sweden. And me and Ulla Brudin, Grevestad, Sweden, we went to their house, and they were teachers. And the school there, they always got us into some home. So we could talk to people. And so we were invited to this Ulla Brudin and her sister, and she taught weaving at the Grevestad school. So how was this course now? Was it beneficial to you? Well, it would be all right if I keep it up. You know what I mean? I thought I learned something at the time, but I really don't– I didn't know enough about it in the first place. Was it easy to digest, I mean, the course? Or did it go too fast? Well, I was in the first year, of course. They had two grades, you know, second year, too. The people had been in Augustana and taken Swedish. So of course, they were way ahead of us. I had taken a course with Margaret Swanson at Blackhawk College. She wanted me to go up there so she wouldn't have to go by herself. So I went with her, but I really didn't go into it very much, you know, so I don't know too much about it. So you had a rough time then to talk to your– Oh, yes. –relation? Oh, yes. I got up and gave a little speech, but I had it written down. I can't remember where it is now. So you were able to communicate with them, though, anyway, to– Yeah, they took me out. See, this family reunion was at the church in Lungsberg Parish near– this place here– Sturefors. Oh, you've had one. And then these people from Stockholm, they had a car, and they took me to the church that Sunday morning. You know, I was so surprised. They had an interpreter during the sermon, the pastor spoke Swedish, of course, and they had a fellow on the side of him by the pulpit there that interpreted to Finnish. There were more Finns up there than anything, I guess. So they had this lovely church. It wasn't big, but, oh, it was just beautiful inside. So you got– I'll put in my pictures. –part of the Finnish language too then? Yeah. So what were you thinking about Sweden after what you have heard from your parents? Well, I was anxious. Was it something like what you expected, or was it different? Oh, I guess it was about what I expected, because I only heard a little bit from– my mother talked about Målela, you know. So you saw her birthplace then in Målela. Yeah, I did. But her house had been taken down. I knew that before I went. But, you know, I took the train from Stockholm by myself. Peg Swanson said I thought I was pretty brave. From Målela? No, from Stockholm. I went down to Målela. I see. So we came there on, say, on Saturday, and on Wednesday I decided if I was going to see Målela. By yourself? I went down. I got the train and went on the train down there. And these people in North Shipping wanted me to come and visit, but I was a little bit scared to get off the train and do it again, you know, and find them, because– Well, anyway, yes, I went down to Målela, and the train was right there, and across the street was–about a block down was the hotel. So I stayed and got registered at the hotel, and I started to think, now where is the church? That's the only thing I knew that I wanted to see, where my mother was confirmed and baptized. So you didn't have anybody to contact there? No, nobody. All alone? No, and I went to this hotel, and of course a lot of younger people can talk English, you know, and I could talk a little bit then, too. But I started walking, and I could not find the church. It was so far away, I guess, and I went to– and there was a nice grocery store there, a nice new brick grocery store, and I went in there, and I asked them where the church was, the Lutheran church. Well, a young fellow heard me saying something about it, and he said–I said– what did I say? I said something about, oh, the cemetery. I wanted to go to the cemetery. And I should have said Graup, is that right? Graup? Schierke-Hoden. Schierke-Hoden. But anyway, he thought I meant the sanitarium. And so he says, I'll take you up there. And so we got in his car, and he went right by the church. And I said, oh, this is where I want to go. I want to go to the sanitarium. So then he let me off there at the church, and I went around, and inside the church was open, and I bought a candle, and they had a lot of candles there, something like Catholic church. Of course, you came from Sweden. Where did you come from? I came from the western part. Where is that? They had candles, and this on the– Oh, yes, big iron thing like this, and they had candles. It's quite a bit like Catholic church, that they have candles for– So you were surprised then to see– Well, and then Gravestad church, they had a big candle thing too, like for baptisms, and they put candles in. And yes, I was kind of surprised about that, but of course, Sweden was Catholic at first. So anyway– So you found a place, then– Oh, yes, and then I stayed overnight, and then– Well, I went up– I walked to the church, and I tell you, I was tired when I got back, because it's just a beautiful cemetery. And the church thing– And they were watering the grass, so you had to walk around a little bit more, and I looked at the tombstones, but I didn't find anybody I really knew. But I found some Wydin, Wydin store, you know, in Moline. And I think that was some of their relatives. Well, they came also from Moline. They came from Moline, I guess. They didn't know for sure, but they thought some of their relatives were there. So anyway, I stayed there. Wydin. And then I took the train back again to Stockholm. Then the next day, I had made up my mind I wasn't going to miss Drottningholm, because the rest of them had gone there that day. I was gone. Two days I was gone, they went to the big– where the government is, you know, State House, you know, the big one. The State House. Yeah, they went in there. Of course, I didn't get to see that. So I went to Drottningholm. I went there by myself, too. Then I came back and did some shopping in that big store. NK? Yeah, NK. Did you compare notes now with the rest of the group that came from here? What they saw and what they thought of Sweden and how they understood it or misunderstood it? What was the difference they didn't expect? Was there any special thing they saw they didn't expect to see? I can't think of anything particular right now. I guess I was just kind of shocked to see so many people that were– Well, they weren't– Of course, it was summertime, and I guess they liked to get as much sun as they could on their bodies, and I think they were underdressed, a lot of them. I was surprised to see so many people that were not in control of their own destiny. In particular, on the bus when we were going home to America, we were coming from the university. We stayed at the university– Uppsala? No, not Uppsala. In Stockholm? Yeah, in Stockholm. We stayed there all that week. There was one lady there that was making a fool of herself there at the university cafeteria, and of course that really surprised me. And Midsummer Day kind of surprised me in Sweden, too. Of course, they stayed out until 4 or 5 o'clock in the morning, and they were out in the streets there in Grebenstad. I understood how they really celebrate their Midsummer. Really. You never see any Midsummer Festival like they were here? Well, I've been to Augustana College, of course. But it's quite different. Yes, it's quite tame. Oh, well, anyway. Your parents, did they belong to any Swedish organizations here in Moline, like Vasa, Vikings, Switzerland? No, I can't remember that they did. No, no, no. My folks never belonged to anything like that. Neither one of them. Only the church. Only the church. Did they have a Swedish newspaper or Swedish-American newspapers in your home? Yes, we used to have that in America, what do you call it, the Svenske Tribunen or something. We used to get that. They come from Chicago, didn't they, or something? Yes, my dad used to have that. But I haven't seen that for a long time. So both your father and your mother could speak and write Swedish? Yes. My dad would write to his cousin, Gustav Holmqvist, in Sweden. And that's how I knew about our relatives in Sweden, because I remember Gustav Holmqvist was a singer, but his cousin wasn't a singer. But the name Gustav Holmqvist stuck by me so long. He was the lead singer in Chicago. Yeah, but Gustav Holmqvist, that name I remember so well. So when I got it, I have relatives in Rockford, Illinois, who also told me about my relatives, and they wanted all the Swedish relatives to come for this reunion. So that was in 19... Oh, I heard about it in about 1972 or something like that. And they started having these, but I never could make it. It seemed like I wanted to go with that American Scandinavian Foundation, you know, or the Pioneer Group. But they never went. They always went Sunday after this. This reunion would be, see, so I never could make it. So they was in Sweden then? Yeah. And Gustav Holmqvist, did he go back to Sweden then too? No, no, no, he wasn't. He was just a visitor when he was there. No, he was just a cousin of my dad's, and he never was the singer. But I remember the name Gustav Holmqvist because it was the same as my dad's cousin in Sweden. Oh, I see. That's all. No, he never came to America either. None of my relatives on my dad's side. But he corresponded with him. My dad used to correspond with his cousin in this farm. That's where they lived, on that farm.