 We have October 10, 1987. And I'm sitting together with Edgar Richard, born 1912, 17 February, in Gothenburg, Nebraska. You are the third generation Swede. Yes. Also the prairie of Nebraska. Right. And if you go back to the one that was born 1812, there was a great-grandfather. Right, right. He came through this country. Yes. That's on my mother's side. No. Uh-huh. Is it your son? It's on your mother's side, no. And he came in 1869. 1869. Together with his wife and your grandfather. Was he born in Sweden? Yes. He was born. Well, both my grandparents, all my grandparents were born in Sweden. And my father was born in Sweden. Your father was born in Sweden? Yeah. But his parents didn't come over here, though. His mother did. Just his mother. Just his mother, uh-huh. And his name in Sweden, what was that then, your father's name? Larsen. Larsen. Uh-huh. And then he got to this country, he changed it to Birchard when he got old enough. What was the reasoning behind that name? Was it a special... I don't know. He never told you why he took that name? No. That was his mother's name, Larsen. Larsen. That's the name he came to this country. But the Birchard now, does he have any... No, only thing I was told at one time he had a friend named Birchard and that's picked that up. Because I was very young when my father passed away. So you never had a chance to talk to him? Just six, yeah. My father passed away at the age of 33 in the flu epidemic. That was in about 1918. Yes. So you were only about five, six years old then? I was six years old then. But this gentleman over there is your grandfather. He's my grandfather on my mother's side. That's Olof E. Stenman and he was born in 1865? Yes. So he was four years old then when they came over here. Right. So they landed in New York or... They landed... Does he say on his paper there? Some place where it said where they landed, I can't... So he came to Galva, Illinois first and then he continued off to Nebraska. Right. Do you know the reason why they continued off to Nebraska? Do you have a relation there or friends that told them? Not that I know of, no. They just traveled west. And they didn't say the reason why they left Sweden? No. No? No. So this grandpa of yours, Olof Stenman, did he live long enough so you could talk to him? Yes. He died in 1945? Yeah. He was an old man then. Did they talk Swedish to you? Yes, they talked Swedish, but I didn't know the language very well. When my father passed away, we lived with my grandparents at sea, and I think when they wanted to say anything about my sister and I, they talked in Swedish. And I sort of got used to the language and learned a little about it. So finally I knew about what they were saying. But he was also able to speak English, though? Yes, very well. That's a pretty good resume of the Stenman. And they became farmers then? Right. My father was originally a carpenter, then he became a farmer. And your grandpa Stenman, he was farming then? Yes. Around Gothenburg? Right. It says Cummins County. I think it's north of Gothenburg. Where is it? Around Brady? It could be. Brady is not too far away. No, that's next town west, Gothenburg. Let's see if I can see something here. No. So how big of a farm did he have then, Stenman? I really don't know. 80 acres? I would say something like that. There was a dairy farm, you had the cattle and a couple of horses. Because you lived with them, you said, a few years? Stenman's, that's when they moved to Gothenburg. When my father died, our family moved in with the Stenman family. The old house is still there on Ames Avenue. He was still farming then at the time? No, then he had this cream station. Well, before the cream station, he had a delivery service where a team of horses pulled a delivery wagon and he made deliveries around town. I don't know what he delivered. Oh, I see. It was like a taxi cab then. Yeah, a barn right there. The barn's been removed. Yeah, the team of horses or just one? Team of horses. Team of horses. Did he deliver people to the different places? That I really don't know. He probably could have, yeah. Did they belong to the church in Gothenburg? Yes. The first Baptist church there. They were one of the original members there. And my father lived on a farm. In fact, he died on his farm. That's just a little west of Gothenburg there, a few miles. It's where that, another, all some people going through there years and years ago, and in the corner of the pasture is a fenced off little cemetery there. I think there are five graves there. Maybe you saw that when you were there. That was on his farm, and he cleaned that patch up and straightened up the crosses, and now it's a monumental place there. Are the Swedes buried there then? I don't know them. Nobody knows who was buried there? No. I guess maybe there's some history record of it. I don't recall it. Do you recall anything of the old history of Gothenburg, who came there first? No. Well, my grandparents were probably one of the first. One of the first settlers. In fact, the home that we lived in is an antique home now. It was built, I think, in 1884, and it's still there. They even used old square nails in that house. It's so old. That's about all I remember there. So you went to school then in Gothenburg? Yes. I went to country school first year, and then the rest of the time in the Gothenburg schools. And you had to help out in the creamery then when you were in town? Yeah. Yeah, I worked about as long as I can remember. Usually on Saturdays and nights I'd count eggs in the grocery stores, and I delivered milk every morning across town. One place north of us in town had a little dairy there, and I delivered half a gallon of milk to this one customer. I got a nickel a day for doing that. A nickel a day. Did everybody walk you? I walked or rode a bicycle. I got a bicycle later. So were there many Swedes living in Gothenburg at that time? Yes. Quite a few when you were growing up. Yeah, in fact they have another church called the Swedish Mission Church. Yeah, but wasn't they all to Brady then? No, they had a church in Gothenburg. The Covenants? Swedish Mission it's called. I'm not too familiar with them, but all our Baptists, most of those are Swedes. They're in Gothenburg. No Lutheran church though in Gothenburg? Yes. There's a Lutheran church, there's one in the north. There was a lot of country Lutheran churches back when, I guess there still are. They had one in the country, then later on one was built in town. I don't know when that was in town. But there was not a Swedish church though? No. No? Except ours I remember, and ours, the Sunday services, were in Swedish language when I first remember. Well, you remember that? Yeah, I don't remember what they said, but I couldn't understand Swedish. Did they go to church often, your family? Yes. What was particular with them? Very religious. And you had to do the same thing then? Yeah. No dances and no swearing and no chewing tobacco? No. No, no picture shows, you couldn't play cards in the house. They were strict then, people. Yeah. Did you have a movie house in Gothenburg? Yes, it was called the Sun Theater. I don't know if it's still there now. No, they don't have any more shows, huh? Nope, that's quite a... Grandpa, did he buy a car? Yeah, he had a car, so did my dad. My dad had a Model T, my grandfather had what I remember as an old Studebaker. So your dad now, what kind of work was he doing in Gothenburg? Well, before he got married he was a carpenter, and then he took up farming after he got married. Oh, he became a farmer? Yeah. All his life? Yeah, he had a very short life, passed away at 33. Oh yeah, you were only five then. I was six years old. That's why you had to go to your grandparents then. And then when you, how old were you when you moved away from Gothenburg? 1937. 1937, I was 25. So the pressure years you spent in Gothenburg, they must have been rough out there in the dust bowl and hard economic conditions. Were people suffering then at that time? Oh, I don't know. It must have been Kansas, wasn't it? Yes. Gothenburg, big farming country there. But it was dry though, there was no irrigation at that time. No irrigation there, no. And there were crop failures in the 30s. Yeah. And also you had the, what was this bank thing where they closed banks? Closed the banks? Yeah. They closed also Gothenburg Bank? Yeah, during that period for a while. Did it open up again? Yeah. You didn't lose any money in it or? Nope. What did they pay back? What did they, I can't think of that, they declared a moratorium on banks or something. Yeah, a week after Roosevelt came in. Yeah, that was it. But they had closed 5,000 banks all over the country the week before though. Yeah. So he was not the one that did it. Were they Republicans, most of the people out there? Oh, I think you have, pretty well mixed. How about your family, were they Republicans? They were Republicans. My wife's a Democrat. And you are still a Republican? I'm still a Republican. I don't play the Republican Party, I try to pick the person. The personnel. It's like my, we're not tuned in are we? You're off. We're off, yeah. My father-in-law just passed away here last June, he was 94. His birthday was May 30th. And Reagan sent him a birthday card, even Nancy signed it. And he was in the hospital then. Boy, I said, boy, this will make you a Republican. He said, not me, I'm a Democrat. But he passed away last... So he didn't want anything to do with Reagan? No, he didn't want anything to do with Reagan, no. Quite a few Swedes were Republicans though. Yeah. Why was that, do you think? Did they feel obliged to go with that party for any reason? I just don't know why. Like the Baptist Church now, were they mostly Republicans in that church then? I would think so, I don't... I never give it much thought. Did you, were you actively involved with politics when you were in Gothenburg? No. You were too young then to pay attention to it. I was very interested in the scouting program. That was my biggest ambition when I was a kid, to become a scout. Then I had a troop of my own. I was the first Eagle Scout in Gothenburg. And I had a troop of my own, and then they had a jamboree in Washington, D.C. It was scheduled for 35, but then you had another flu epidemic in 35, and then they went to 37. I took a troop to the Cherry Point in Washington, D.C. And that gave me a chance, and the telephone company had a chance to go with them here in Omaha, and that brought me to Omaha. They were starting a safety program, and I had, oh, I was a Red Cross instructor and also a swimming instructor for Dawson County, western Nebraska. And I went up there, and he said, hey, Red Cross looking for a director. I said, can you swim? He said, I thought I could. So I got hired as Red Cross director here in Omaha, and that gave me my start. I learned to swim better, though. We had quite a program way back then. Who got you started in the Boy Scouts out in Gothenburg? Well, it was a Gothenburg fellow named Frank Mahan, worked Union Pacific. Then he came to Omaha, and then he was setting up scout programs in Union Pacific throughout that area, and that gave me the start. So you were the leader then for the Boy Scouts in Gothenburg? Yeah. I was the first one I joined then, and when I got old enough I became scoutmaster. Oh, the Pony Express Station, you see that out there? North Platte. In Gothenburg. Oh, in Gothenburg, yes, one, yeah. That was moved in. Mrs. Williams owned it, and the American Legion moved it in, and that's where I held my scout meetings. They moved it in for my scout meetings. Now it's a souvenir type of thing. So were you interested in history for the Scouts and taught them about different things throughout the area? Yeah. So you had a lot of outdoors activities, I suppose, camping out there. About every weekend I'd take them out. We'd camp around the country there. North Platte River. Yeah, we know all about the Platte River. There's a lot of ranch land out there. Oh, yeah. The Sandhills. And did you notice that on the northwest part of Omaha your Sandhills starts, and on the east side it's Lowerland. You've got a split land right there in Gothenburg. In Gothenburg, yeah. But the Sandhills, they start right there. Yeah. And continue all the way up to... To northwest, yeah. South Dakota. Yeah. So how big of a group or troop did you have then in Gothenburg where you were able to round up? Oh, I think I had... I think we had about 24 kids in there. Then around that lake we had our little old park on the west side. And one day when we were digging around we found a big hole. We kept digging it out, we found a big underground cave. It's not there now. I guess it's covered up. Oh, I see. Yeah. And also became an amateur radio operator there. And the Navy was looking for a radio communications center out at North Platte. Didn't have any radio operators in Gothenburg. We had about four or five of us, so we joined the Navy Reserves. That was in 1934. I stuck with that off and on all my life. Finally retired after 38 years. I put six years active duty in. In the Navy? Yeah. During the war? Yeah. War caught me and then I got called up for the Korean II. What did your grandfather say about this activity with the Boy Scouts and amateur radio? Did he understand it? Yeah. What did he say? Oh, he liked it. I set up me a little radio shop in an old-fashioned war house I fixed up. Yeah, a scouting program. Everybody liked that. Did your grandpa listen to Roosevelt's entire speeches? Yeah. Everybody liked him. They did? Yeah. So they had nothing against Roosevelt and the Republicans? No, not to my knowledge. He was all right. When did you move into Omaha then, let's say, in later years? In late 1937. I think it was October 1937. You moved to Omaha? Yeah. And you were still active in Red Cross then? Yeah. I went with them professionally then as a safety director. For the whole state of Nebraska? No, just the Omaha area at that time, yeah. And it was a full-time job? Yeah. Yeah, we set up programs in all big industries. Union Pacific was one of them. Northwestern, Bell, Western Electric. Corps of Engineers, another one. Also put it in all nursing schools had to teach it. Then we had it all in the school program. That was the course in all school programs. I also taught at University of Nebraska, I mean University of Omaha. Industrial safety. I didn't have a degree, but somebody signed it so I could teach, I guess. You had a lot of experience. Yeah, I also taught in Corps School in Bainbridge, Maryland, during the war for two years. I was director of first aid and minor surgery there. And this, you were married to your first wife then? Yeah. And your son was born out there? He was born in Bainbridge, yeah. And then you also worked with the U.S. Veteran Hospital? Yeah. Oh, that was a volunteer thing. After I retired, after the come back from the war, I worked about a year at Red Cross. And then one of my people I conducted a class wanted me to go to work for Seal Test Ice Cream Company. So finally I went with them and I worked with them for 25 years and I became general manager of the Seal Test Ice Cream Company. And I retired from them. Here in Omaha? Yeah. Before I, oh, I traveled both Iowa and Nebraska. I lived once in Columbus, Nebraska, and then they moved me to Lincoln and I set up an operation there. And I came back to Omaha. So you sold wholesale then to stores? Yeah. We set up store accounts. We also had Pepsi Cola, but our company sold that off. It's now known as Craft Corporation. Seal Test is affiliated with Craft. Breyer Ice Cream is also the same one. And then after I retired there, I became interested in the VA hospital and I was a volunteer there for a few years. Until I had a little accident trimming a tree out here. Broke my ankle. Oh, you did? See, that's why I wear that kind of shoe. The Boy Scout years were behind you then. You were not able to tackle the fall. Yeah. And then there was this Nebraska chapter of SCORE. SCORE, what does that stand for? That's Service Corps Retired Executives. That's affiliated with the Small Business Administration, which is a government agency. And what we try to do is people going to business, try to find out what their needs might be and see if we can help them make different connections, which we've experienced. There's a lot of political connections you have to make for them. I find out in small business today, they like simplified bookkeeping is one of the important things in small business. A lot of them say, well, I got an accountant. I say, what's good in an accountant if you don't know what he's doing? And then another one is theft. There's a lot of that. Boy, you know that, you listen to it. It's getting worse every day. So you help people on a voluntary basis? Yeah. So you've been keeping busy then over the years? Yeah. Do you still have a relation in Gothenburg? Yes, I have an aunt live there. In fact, she was born in the same house I was, and she lives next door south now in the house. She's done football games a day, I think. So three generations were born out there in Gothenburg? Yeah, same house. Same house. And the house is still standing? Yeah. It's a lot of history there. Yeah, sure is. So you lost your father now when you were so young, five years old. Did the grandpa take care of you then to bring you up? Yeah, yeah. What did he taught you or any kind of lessons that you had good use of? Help others or? Help others, and I helped him in the cream station when I could. You were very close to him then? Yeah. What kind of man was he? Was he a layback? No, he was very good. He was very ambitious. Very good. He never went back to Sweden for a visit? No, I don't know of any of them that did. Not any of them that came here and stayed here? One banker friend I had there, he said I should go back to Sweden and try to trace my father's ancestry. He said, you might be worth a fortune. He said they couldn't take money out of the country. In Swedish, I guess, maybe you know that they keep a diary of every generation on back. So you know very little about your father then? Yeah, very little. But on the Stierman family you have better. And this thanks to your grandpa, he voted on in 1940. October 20th. And we buried my grandmother with my grandfather and my mother. They're buried out there at Gothenburg Cemetery. And your father also? Yeah. Your whole family? I have them all together out there. And that cemetery is right in Gothenburg? Yeah. And the Baptist church is still going? Oh yeah, very strong. Very strong? Yeah. So what kind of people have moved in now then after the Swedes? I don't know. I've been gone for quite a few years. You haven't been back? Oh, I go back once in a while. I like to go back again one of these days. Your generation, did they move away from Gothenburg to find other places? Oh, I imagine about half did, yeah. Would you two like a cup of coffee? You were interested in Boy Scouts, of course. How old were you when you started as a Boy Scout? Twelve. Twelve. How about other sports and athletics? I played basketball and football. Football too? Yeah. A little softball, but I wasn't too interested. And the football team, did you have a name on them out there? Swedes. Gothenburg Swedes. You were called that? Yeah. You had that on the jersey? I don't know if they had it on the jersey, but I can't remember. But that's what you were dubbed as, Gothenburg Swedes. You had a good team? Yeah, usually did. You had a... And then a friend of mine whose father passed away about the same time mine did. And we lived right across the alley from each other. He's now the father-in-law of Coach Osborne at Coach's University, Nebraska. Coaches his team here. Oh, I see. How about your grandma now? Yeah. You met her also, of course. Oh, yes. I knew her very well. Did she speak any Swedish? Yes, very good Swedish. In fact, they both talked Swedish quite a bit, my grandparents. What else do you remember now of those two old people? Because to you they were very, very old. We had all the Swedish customs, especially around Christmas time. We had to have lutefisk, you know, and dappegrita. Dappegrita. Yeah. And then they slaughtered a hog. Yeah. And a calf before Christmas. Yeah. We had all those. And you took care of all the intestines to fix sylta and various things. Yeah. How about Christmas now? You had a Christmas tree. Yes. What did your grandpa cut dead on in the neighborhood? There's no Christmas trees around there. No, I, I. Was he using juniper bush? I think so. No fir or spruce? No. So he took it into the house then? Yeah. Put it on the stand, and then you dressed it? Yeah. What kind of ornaments did you have used for it? Anything we could find. And your sister now, is she older than you or? Yes. A little bit older. She's two years older than I am. So you could do the dressing. How about Santa Claus, did he come for Christmas? No, they didn't plug that up too much there. Did they have it in church? Not that I recall. No, that was a very religious thing there. They had no Christmas tree in the church? Not that I could recall. They may have. But you don't remember anything? I don't remember that. The Christmas tree you had now, did you have live candles in it? Yes. Did you give presents to each other on Christmas Eve? Yes. And then you looked down in the morning? Yeah, then you hang your stocking and you get. Oh, you had that? Yeah. We hung stockings around. I see. Got something. And then you had relatives over during the holidays? Yes. And your grandpa and grandma, now they didn't work on Sunday? No. Nothing out in the field or? No. Well, he lived in the city then, so he didn't have any fields, so. No, he lived in the city as long as I can remember. I don't remember him living in the country. Like your daddy was farming, you know, you said, but then he died when you were five. Did he sell the farm or sold them? Yes. And your mother moved in then with. Yeah, she moved in with her parents. So she took care of her parents then? Yeah. They didn't have to go to retirement home or? Nope. They stayed right there and died right there? Stayed right there in the same house. How about the doctor? You had to go to North Platte and Lexington or? No, they had a doctor there, Dr. Anderson. He got to work? Yes. Sounds like a Swede. He's a Swede too, yeah. And my mother worked for him at one time too. Oh, I see. So he was a general practitioner. Yeah. In fact, we go there on Christmas Eve, and on Christmas Eve you have Duppelgritte, wasn't it? Yeah. Yeah. At his place? At his place, the doctor's place. I see. And he was a Baptist too then? Yes. He was a Baptist in the same church. And he was married and? Yes, and he had, well, I'm not sure. There's two sons and one daughter, but one of his sons was a doctor, became a doctor. Did the people go to the doctor often? They had to be all for the sake before they went to the doctor's office? Usually, uh-huh. Half dead? Yeah. The interview continues next night. Next night. Do you remember if there were any Swedish festivals in Gothenburg? Not to my knowledge. No? No midsummer or anything like that? No. Lucia? Santa Lucia? You never heard of that? No. No? No. Did they continue to use Swedish in the church? Yes, they, the services were in Swedish, and then they gradually went into the American language. As long as the old-timers lived, they kept the Swedish, then? Yes, uh-huh. And the pastor, was he usually a Swedish? Yeah, he was Swedish. Did you go to Sunday school? Yes. In the church? Yes. Do you remember if you had a school in the summer where you learned Swedish? No, they didn't teach us Swedish. They didn't? No, it was Sunday school, and I became a Sunday school teacher, and then I was a Sunday school superintendent for a period. So who taught you there, the pastor or your grandpa? The pastor. But like grandpa, did he read all the Bible sometimes at home? Yes, yes. Yeah, they were very religious. So they had been baptized in Sweden? I would say yes, uh-huh. So the Baptist church, now, did they use immersion for baptism out there in the church? In Gothenburg, yes. You had, was there often a creek outside in the summer, or? No, they had a baptism tank in the church. In the church? Yes. In fact, they do today, and they have there now. Never outside in a creek? Well, some people request that, I think. But you don't remember that? No, no. And when you were growing up, there were a lot of Swedish girls and boys, so they could marry each other. But what happened then when there were no Swedish girls left, then you had to do like you, you had to look for a German girl. Yeah, you forget what you are, I guess. What did the grandpa say then to grandma? Well, not, I don't know, not much, because all her children married Swedish. Oh, they did? Yeah. But there were no Swedes left, or were you? Not for me, no. They were all gone. You had no choice. Yeah. Oh, I have an aunt that didn't marry a Swede. Yeah, just one aunt. And something else. Like his, your grandpa's children, did they stay within the Baptist faith then? Did they marry into other religions? Yes, they started that way, and then as they moved, they may have changed. I know one moved to Kozad, and they changed. But like my aunt now, still in Gothenburg, she's very active in the Baptist church, same church. Stayed there for years. Because you were born in, two other generations were also born there. That's right. And they're still standing. Right. And there was the old steelman house, he built it. Yep. It's been there for a long time. And your aunt, she's living close to it, or? Next door south. Next door south. And she's been in Gothenburg all her life? That's right. Never moved out of Dawson County? Nope. So do you have any special festivals in Gothenburg that reflect any Swedish background or anything like that? No, unless they had a harvest festival every year, and I don't know why. They may have played up some Swedish background there. I can't recall. You remember any Swedish visiting Gothenburg at any time? No, not to my knowledge. You don't remember that. Fourth of July, was there a big year happening? No, not too much. Firecrackers and? Oh, they had those. But no big celebration. So the old Pony Express went through Gothenburg? Right. Then at Willow Isle, and that's between Cosette and Gothenburg, there's an old Pony Express stop there. There was a post office at one time and an old grocery store. I don't know what it is now. So the rest of the people living out there, were they of Czechoslovakian background and Germans? I think so. There's quite a few Germans there. Because this Cosette, that sounds like a Czechoslovakian name. And they were farmers. Farmers. There's the living livelihood they have around there. Ranching. Cattle feeding. Right. And now it's irrigated. Now it's irrigated. Everything getting modernized now. So agriculture was as good out there as it was in Iowa. Right. But you remember back in the 30s though, when it was dry and windy? Yeah. Blowing big drifts of topsoil or sand. Right. There were no soup kitchens in Gothenburg during the Depression. Did you remember? No, I don't think so. Did they have to feed the hungry people? No, to my knowledge. That was the end of the interview with Ed Butchard, Oman, Nebraska. End of interview.