 August 26, 1986, and I sat together with Mr. Roy Nelson and his wife Helen Nelson in Minneapolis, Minnesota. And Roy was born 1907, 10th of January in Minneapolis, and Mrs. Nelson, 1908, 13th of November, also in Minneapolis. Both your parents, now, they came from Sweden? Yeah, both of them came from Sweden. Albert Nelson and Helga Nelson. Yeah, they came from Hengelholm and Skåne, and one from Torg and Småland. Do you know the reason why they came over here? Because, as far as my mother was concerned, because the rest of her family was over here. Their sisters and brothers had gone ahead. But Dad, I don't know. I think he just came over to get out of, I don't know what reason. So he came around 1992, 1993? Yeah. Was he the only one from his family that came over? No, there was no other of his family that came over, no. He was the only one. The only one. He had some brothers or sisters that we went over and saw. Our cousins in Malmö that were family of his, so that they were my cousins on my father's side. And we met those people in 1971 when we were over there. But on your mother's side you had... Well, the only one left over there was a brother and a sister. And they're both gone now, but there's a cousin over there yet. How many came over here then from Torg? Well, there was one... Six? Six, I think. There was eight in the family, yeah. Six, six, and there was four girls and two, no, three of eight, three boys and three girls. Frank and Kustov and Emil, Ellen, Helga, and Ida. That was it. And they all settled here in Minneapolis? They all settled in Minneapolis. Some of them, Kustov went to San Francisco and settled there and got married, and so that, I have cousins in El Cerrito, I think it is, and the rest of them all settled in Minneapolis. So your parents, they met there in Minneapolis and married? Yeah. Well, my wife's uncle is married to my aunt, so we are really, she's my cousin's cousin, but she's also my wife. She's not my cousin. So you've known each other for a long time? Oh yeah, that's right. Our parents went together when they were young. I see. I mean, they met, you know, by Donaldson's, I guess. I guess our mothers and fathers have told us that she sat on my lap when I was a year and a half when she was about six months. I held her to my lap then. I didn't know that until I got to 19 or 20. So in what section of Minneapolis did they settle? South Minneapolis. South Minneapolis. Right. I was born on Pillsbury Avenue, and you were too, 26th or 28th, something like that. Well, although I wasn't born there. No, you were born up in Greeley, that's right, up north. But that's the right, the way you came down to South Minneapolis. Right, after that, yeah. And who married then, or what church? Zion Lutheran Church. Zion Lutheran Church. 33rd and Pillsbury. So they became members there. Oh yeah, they became members when they started that. It was a new church that started away from the Augustana Church on 7th and 7th Street and 11th Avenue. That church started at 1 on 33rd and Pillsbury. And you're the other charter member of that? My mother and dad are charter members of that, yeah. That's right. So you went to Sunday school there and confirmed? Sure, I was a Sunday school treasurer for a long time. Then I got interested in Boston and I got busy there. So you belonged then to the young people, the Luther League? Oh yeah, back in those days, right. And how about your wife now? She belonged to it too. I went to that same church. So all the activities. All activities centered around our church and our lives. I guess that's about the whole thing. Do you remember if you traveled outside the city for meetings and group meetings with the church group? Not for the church, no. You didn't go up to Center City or Alexandria? No. No, we didn't get into any outside activity except to go there on Sundays for Sunday school and stuff. Otherwise we didn't get into it. After we got confirmed, we sort of got busy working, both of us, and didn't go too much, right? And then we got married in 1930. 1930, right. Was that an English-speaking congregation from the beginning? No, we were confirmed in Swedish. I think I wasn't. No, I think you were confirmed in English and I was in Swedish. So you were able then to communicate and understand them? Yeah, when I went to grade school, my first day in school, I couldn't talk English. I came home crying and telling my mother, I couldn't understand. And she stopped talking Swedish and we cut. That was a mistake that she realized, that they should have been talking English before I got to go to school. Were you the oldest one in the family? Yeah, I'm the oldest one. I had two sisters. So three children? Yeah, two sisters and Roy. Oh. So that was the end of the Swedish? Really, that's when we stopped talking Swedish and I didn't really keep it up. And they never stressed it even in any form? No, no. We kept going to Swedish things, but we didn't talk Swedish very much. So outside the church now, your parents belonged to Trollhättan Lodge? Trollhättan Lodge, yeah. Were they charter members? Well, he was a charter member of Trollhättan Lodge, which started, I think, in 1907 or something like that. And... That was one of the first lodges in... Well, boy, there was... In the same years, it was 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, and 41. Started in about the same time. And... A lot of them went together. And finally John Morton got started out of Trollhättan, but half of Trollhättan joined John Morton when they got old and couldn't get any people to take office. And halfway, half of them went into Stenbuk and half of them went into John Morton, of the old people that were left. How did that happen, though, that John Morton was started? Well, it was just that we had a Trollhättan drill team of about 18 or so young people that were not talking too much Swedish, and they tried to get Trollhättan to change their language to English. That was a time when the transition was going on, you know, and they were changing over. The funny part was we decided, well, they wouldn't do it, so we started a snooze lodge in the English language, at that time in Richfield, Minnesota. It was outside of... Couldn't do it in the same town. That was against the rules. Well, you couldn't do that. No, you had to have it in a suburb or something. So we started in Richfield. And then we went about two years, and then Trollhättan changed to English. It was very, very foolish because, well, it was all right. We still got a good lodge in John Morton. I think John Morton is about the biggest lodge in Minnesota right now. So the newcomers now from Sweden at that time, do you remember if anybody was coming in the 20s? Well, yeah, every once in a while you'd get new members that would come in from Sweden, you know. New members from Sweden. Yeah, but they would join the lodges that were talking Swedish, of course. They did. Sure. Then we got members that would transfer into our lodge after they got here for a while and started to learn the language and were able to get around with the rest of us. So we accumulated a few of those members, too. So how many members were the charter members then the first meeting night there? Well, we had 18 that came over, and then we ended up, before they closed the charter, we had 65 in John Morton. But then we lost quite a few of those, too. They didn't stay too long. It's been a transition. They were younger, so we lost some of them because they got married and then raised a family, and now we got them back again. I don't know how you can figure that out, but they didn't have time for lodges, but they had to take care of the kids. Was there a difference if they had their own house or if they rented an apartment, for instance? Did they have more time then? No, I didn't make any difference much. No? We had just as many of them. Most of them would be in homes of their own, I think, that we had in our lodge. Most of them all had their own homes. It's quite a bit of... You're getting more rental properties now than you did then in those days. Back in those days, you had your own home or lived with your family or something like that. Even in the 30s? Yep. In 1930, that was a tough time. There was kind of a depression, you remember? If you were working and earning $20 a week, you were in clover. But if you didn't have a job, you were getting in a food line somewhere. So how did you start out? I happened to get a job all through that time. Through the depression? Right. I guess we worked for a coal company for a while and then got into a contracting company after 1934. That was when I went with Mr. Anderberg and his company. And that's from there on. We were in business there of our own, so that was pretty good. We had about 14. Anderberg, was he the former vice grandmaster? He was the former vice grandmaster in 1932. He was elected in Seattle. And he stayed on for four years? Oh, yeah. He stayed on, I guess it was three years. But then he ran a competition of drill teams in the World's Fair at 1933. Chicago. Yeah, we won that one. The John Morton Lodge won it. So how many were you then? We had a Boston team and a Buffalo team and two from Chicago and one from St. Paul. It was a junior group. Was there only men then? No, no. There was men and women and men. Together? Yeah. We had both girls and boys on our team. Sixteen? Sixteen. Yeah, there was eight girls and eight boys. And the Boston team was all men. I think they would have beat us too if it hadn't been that hot in the hot sun in Chicago. But they were in tuxedos and they just about wielded in the about 100 degrees that day. We had a white uniform and it was slick. Was it at the Soldier's Field? Yeah, at the Soldier's Field at the World's Fair. How were you judged then? Well, there were some outside judges that had nothing to do with Vassa that did the grading of them. They gave you points then for... Then we dropped... that was where we kept our team. We didn't have that so much to do when we got a lodge going. We got into bowling and what have you, keep the kids busy. You mentioned tuxedo. That was the Boston team. What kind of uniform did you have? We had just a white trouser and a white shirt with a label on the front that said JM. They thought we were John Mansfield Asbestos Company when they saw us down there. That's why you get so many votes. That's right. Probably. So how long did they drill the nest? You had several of them? Oh, yeah. There was just one. It was only 25 minutes or 20 minutes. The drill that we put on, the display drill was 20 minutes. They were all the same length or less. And Anderberg, he was the... Well, he was the one that started the thing. He was the chairman of the idea. Who was the drill master at the time? Well, he was our drill master in the beginning, but I was the drill master at the time. We were in 33. For the exhibit? Yeah. He had promoted me to that point. So... So that was a hot day. That was a hot day, yeah. Then we went along and I guess I got into the district lodge as a delegate for 1927. Then I was an auditor several years and a... For the district? Yeah, and then for the trustee for some years. Then I got on the board as a, I think, a vice secretary for a while. I know, then I was a vice district master. And I was district master in 1946. And we went to the Grand Lodge in 1950 as a delegate. And I wasn't supposed to be elected, but we had already decided that we were running a man from Minnesota. But we had a railroad strike, and he was out getting some tickets for it, so when we started the election, he hadn't got back. And they wouldn't let him in because the election was going on. And so somebody from behind me says, well, you've got to run, he's from Massachusetts, says you've got to have someone from Minnesota. I said, no, don't nominate me. But they did, and I got elected, so I was on the board. And from there on, it was one thing after the other. I met Okamark, and he passed away during the term, and I was put in there because Okamark, I think, had picked me out to be the treasurer. So I was treasurer for what, 10 years, 12 years? 12 years. Then I got to be vice grandmaster in 1966. But Bertolt Winstrom was grandmaster then. And I knew that he had the archives lined up and working on it, and he had passed the thing in 70 years that they would start an archive. And that was when I was going to get out of that thing because if he had the plans going, I couldn't very well take over. So I just got out of being vice grandmaster and told him I'd help him whenever he got going. Then he got elected again, and we had Hank Anderson as vice grandmaster, and I got to be financial secretary of the archives. I was on the building committee first, along with Carl Fredrickson and Winstrom. And we, matter of fact, I think I was the one that told Carl who to get a hold of down there because my nephew lives in Geneseo, his name was Jim Hendrickson, and they just built a new house, and this guy Sties had built it. And I'd been down there and seen it, and he had really a nice new home for not too bad price. And me, I was in the contracting business up here, so we knew a little bit about it. And Carl called and said that he got a couple of bids, but they were way out of line. Well, I says, go ahead and get this Sties and find out what he has. And he did, and he got the best bid, so that's how he got to do it. And that's how Sties built it. Of course, that caused a little trouble, I think. I think there was a man from Bishop Hill that had bid on it too. But that wasn't the point. We had to get it built as cheap as we could and good as we could. I wasn't there at the time. I was just calling on the phone. But Carl was like a supervisor. He was really a supervisor of starting the building and getting it going. And I think Burr helped draw the plans of how they wanted it because I know I got the copies of it and said that was fine with me. I wasn't going to change it. It looked good to me, and it is all right the way it is. They can have a room if they want to expand it too. But it was hard in the beginning, though, to convince people to go out to Massachusetts and New Jersey. Yes, and still Massachusetts is one of our best supporters now. And it's a surprising thing because, well, it still ended up in the best place because it's in the central part of the country. And you can get there if you go on a trip. It doesn't take you much to get off of 80 and go in and say hello. So it's a good place for it. And now it turns out that it's in a nationally recognized area, so it'll probably stay longer than Hawthorne stays for that matter. It can keep on going for years. It's a safe place. Right. We think that if we can build up a fund, then we could live off the interest that we'd have it fixed, wouldn't we? It's coming, but it isn't coming yet. It's getting there, though. Omaha was one of the largest, really. Well, they came along with $10,000. And when we got, I think we had around $70,000 or $80,000, enough to pay for the building when we started building. So we went down there and had a meeting and decided where to build it. We finally found about the, decided on the lot. And I think what they should have done was got the lot behind where they built a new house, but he wouldn't sell that. Well, it was an interesting feature. One thing the bosses never had before was a building of their own as a grand lodge. And that's how I got into the archives business. I wasn't going to be the one that was going to try to do the building of it because I knew that Pearl had the plans all in his mind and what he wanted to do. Yes, but you have been a good support for him, though. Oh, yeah, we've always helped him. Keeping active and is always compendium. And Carl was working hard with him, too, at the time. I don't know what will happen now. Now he's getting old. He's 90, of course. I know. It was slipping a little bit. I know he sat by me at this convention, and you kind of had to talk to him. I don't think he heard it all either. So it was, I suppose, 90 years old, sometimes. The years takes its toll. But I think there was other things in that. I don't know. We never got into that. Anyway, if we go back now to the Depression time, it's interesting to study the statistic in the yearly proceedings. Well, we had many more members at that time. Yes, but you could see how the hardship came on. Dinner started to slip. Like Mora Lodge, they lost 32 members in 1932. But Mayflower lost 39, just one in Willmar. Willmar, we started that lodge, I think, not too early, and they only lasted about three years. Now what happened there? It's a real Swedish area. Yes, it was a real Swedish area. But when we left that night after we started that lodge, Mr. Anderberg said to me, he says, Well, I don't know how long this is going to last. We have got the minister of the church as the chaplain of the lodge. And it lasted three years, and I'm pretty sure he got him back in the plock after that. So there you are. So you think it was too much competition with the church? Well, he wanted him in the church, and he didn't want to have the boss who I pay money out to boss, you know, might as well get into my church. I pay dues to boss, so he might as well pay dues to the church. I'm sure this is a thing there. Because there was the feeling in the early 1900s. Way back, you had that in the early times. Yes, there were really anti-religious demands. The church didn't like it at all. But now they will go with you on it, because even my nephew down there in Geneseo, he was in the church down there, and they wanted to find out if it was okay. And it was perfectly okay. So there was no opposition now. Was that a first-century church in Geneseo? No, he was with the Missouri Synod. They are more orthodox, though, then. Right. He said, Our church is much more strict about whether you belong to the masons or whatever. And he got the okay. I don't think they got him into the Lodge, but I was trying to get him. But General Lyndon Coccotto in 1932, they gained 15 members, and Steinbock, they gained 5 members. So Coccottos was also a country church town. Those were country towns, and they just got started. But they had different ideas. Yes, they had different ideas. We had a Lodge in Coccotto and one in Litchfield. You got that one down, too? There was a strong Lodge. There was a strong Lodge, but they seemed to pass. The only ones that were started in 1929 and 1930 that's living yet is Sunshine and Land O'Lakes. They're the only ones that are still keeping going, and they're not very strong, either one of them. There's one up in Sandstone. No. Land O'Lakes. Land O'Lakes and Lindstrom. And that's a Swedish area. It should be much stronger. They only have about 8 members. But they only have 8 or 9 members, and they don't ask anybody else, and that's the trouble. You go up there and talk to them, and it's too much work to get started. They feel comfortable as they are. And in 1933, the Steinbock Lodge, too, and Trollehtan, too, and the monitoring still was, they gained one. And Mayflower, I think, lost 59. They had a lot of members out there. They had a lot of members, but that was about the time they folded when they were up about 59. I think maybe they were thinking they were taking too many away. They were just afraid to drain the church. They were getting stronger than the church. And then there was also problems with the friendship lodge in Cambridge. I don't remember what that was. They had a lawyer on it. He had to go up there, Hausergren or Hauserfors, or whatever his name was. They didn't want to give the books away or the charters or anything. Yeah, they folded, and they had quite a bit of money in their treasury, I think, and it's supposed to have gone over to the district, but I don't think they ever got it. They kept the lodge in cloquet the same way that I think the year before they had around $3,000 in the treasury, but when they folded they had $31.50. They kept it well. They either used it or divided it up for something. So Trullet and, of course, when they folded the last time, they just gave the lodge that they joined, whatever, divided up pro rata to wherever that member went. They really didn't. I don't say they folded. They just joined and they still are VASA members, but they belong to other lodges. They actually didn't close. The members still belonged to either John Morton or Trullet or Runeberg in Minneapolis. So their money that they had in their funds, they just prorated it to the lodge that the member joined. I think it was a couple hundred dollars a piece that went into the, for each member that went into the lodge. And then in 1934 something happened. The Monitor gained eight members. Yeah. No, Mayflower, I mean, out in the… Mayflower gained. Out in Litchfield, in the Wilmar. Well, now I don't know… I don't know how they counted the statistics, but they gained eight members. They lost 59 the previous year. And then Jenny Lynn in Cocaita, they asked to half the dues instead of 350. They wanted the members to pay more than 50. They wanted to pay less dues. Yeah. It was a hard time then in 1934. Yeah, that's right. They wanted to cut the dues down. And that was approved. Yeah, that's right. And you also came in 1934 with children's activities. How? They called it Barnarbetet. Well, they really started in 1927. I told you earlier, but they started two clubs, which is about the same time as John Morton started. And then Linnea Ostman was the leader of that. Oh, she was there many years. Oh, yeah, she was there for 41 years. Did she travel around then in the district? Yeah, well, she would take the kids out for different programs and so on. She put a lot of her own money in there. Helping the kids to get there, you know. Yeah. She was driving her own car then, or how did she? Well, she had a friend by the name of Melvin Swanson that would take her around. They finally got married about, I think he was married to somebody that was in a mental hospital, I think, in La Crosse. And it wasn't free to marry anybody, but I guess he was associating with Linnea and taking her around and being her chauffeur. And then finally, after his wife died, well, they both were married then. So she was Linnea Ostman Swanson for probably the last six, seven years, right? Right. So Minneapolis lodges, they were the only one with children? No, there was one St. Paul Linnea. Oh, St. Paul, yeah. St. Paul and Minneapolis are the only children's clubs. I think we had some up in either Duluth or Hibbing or something for a while, but it didn't last very long. It's hard to keep them going. It's hard to get the right one to take care. That's the problem. Of course, now they've got a couple, three. They've got Janice Lehman and Katherine Johnson and Joanne Therrine are working on helping the kids, and of course a pretty good mother's club now. They're graduating about 11 kids right now. That's going to spoil the club for a while until they get some new ones. They're all going to just start college, and that's going to take a lot of real good members out of their little club. But they all belong to some lodge, so they're all still members. Do they usually continue on belonging to the lodge? Well, they join, and then we have some like, well, members of our lodge that have been years and years ago that were kids in the kids' club. They don't come very much, but they are members yet. Supportive. Yeah. In 1935, there was a turnaround. Steenbock gained 50 members. John Morton gained 10. We were... Mayflower lost 13. They were still in there. Well, we had started a Vasa Park out at Minnetonka. At that time? 1930. Those were hard times, too, but they built it up, and it started going pretty good, and we really had a good turn. So you were able to keep it then, during the 1930s? Well, we kept it up until 1967. But then we were more or less at the end. The people, we were on Lake Minnetonka, and the neighbor, although we had eminent domain, they couldn't kick us out of there. It's not too far from here, then? No, it's just out here by Lake Minnetonka, just a little ways. And we were 14 acres we had there, and... You were raising the taxes on it. Yeah. Did you buy it reasonably? Oh, yeah. We bought the 10 acres for $10,000 and sold it for about seven times that. But you were able to keep it until the 1930s? Well, we kept it for 37 years. And dances every Saturday? Dances every Saturday night, and that's what kept a lot of people coming, you know. So you had the bungalow or a pavilion? A pavilion and a kitchen and a beer parlor and a biffy hall. That's the three buildings we had. Of course, there was a case we had an outdoor toilet, and that had to get sewers. Well, the extensions came in then, too. All of a sudden, in 1967, they had wanted $8,000 for a sewer line outside. Then later on, we had to connect for another, so that was time to move it. And now it's in three lots, and three rich people have their summer homes out there or their homes out there now. They're all here. During the 30s, was it easy then for people in Minneapolis and Paltrow to come out there? Oh, yeah. Sure, there was only 15 miles, about 20 miles or so to come to the park. You had a streetcar line going on? No, no. No, they had cars. Yeah. And we had a big parking lot out there. There were times when we had, oh, we even had the Governor Floyd B. Olson out there one time. We had about 5,000 people then. But there was a lot of work. Anyway, now we're just kind of keepers of the funds and using it. We invested and spend the interest on it. It's been pretty good now. It's 15 percent. But it's going down to six and seven now. It's not going to be so good. But it was a good foundation for the members when they got sick and had problems. Yeah. Funeral benefit. Well, of course, that funeral benefit, that's going out, I'm sure. Every district is losing it. That's just going to die out. You can't... What's $100 anyway nowadays to bury a guy? It don't help much. What we needed is, a long time ago, they should have had an insurance policy. There was no way to raise that funeral benefit over the years. Without raising your dues on it, too. Yeah, I know. You had to raise your dues. But what would they say then if you had raised it to a... Oh, no. I think...... you signed, too. So to be up to snuff, all those benefits and hospital or place of work, so to speak, they had to be raised every year almost. But the members wouldn't go along with it. So if you raised 10 cents, there would be an uproar. That's right. Right. How come? Well, I don't know. Were the Swedes more tight than other groups, you think? I think they are. Well, I think so. Of course, you see, we in 1954, they kind of dropped the idea of having the funeral fund. And you let everybody in as a non-benefit member. And I think we've taken in non-benefit members ever since. They just come in for the social time or the heritage time just because you're a Scandinavian and want to be with your heritage, your group. This is what it is now. It isn't to see if they can get any money out of the place, you know, to bury me. They aren't looking forward to that. That was passed on... But we still have a lot of members that belong that are waiting for their $100, and I think they've all paid in $150 or more. So that was a bad investment. It is. Yeah, it was a bad investment. They live too long if you're still... I'm sure. People live longer now. We were in it when we first joined, but after a while, when John Morton... In our lodge, we don't have that funeral benefit. We just dropped out of that and are in the social end of it, or the... I shouldn't say social, but the non-benefit members, what they call it. And we've got 141 members. That's pretty good. How much was the reason of a funeral, for instance, in the 1930s? Well, I think it was a couple of $300. You could get even up to... Oh, I think up to the 40s, you could get a burial for around $200, $250. There wouldn't be nothing more than... There wouldn't be any service or anything, but they would take care of it. So then $100 was... Now you go $2,000 or you don't get buried very good, right? Oh, I guess it's cheaper than that if you want to. But it all depends on how classy you want to be. So that wasn't a good thing in the old days, yes. When you came over from Sweden and you could pay a dollar a week or a dollar and get $100 back, that sounded real good. And you were young enough so they didn't die, so they were just building up a big fund. Then when they started going, well, that took the money out of there in a hurry. How about the hospitalization, with $1 a day? Well, the hospitalization, we've got that going here, but we don't have too many members belong, because of the fact that Social Security takes care of you. Companies have their hospitalizations. Yeah, and if you're working, you're in a hospitalization usually in the company you're working for. But there were many widows, non-working, and ladies that worked in families, for instance. They didn't have any children. No, that's the ones that you could get into the fund. They belonged to the order to get the hospitalization. Right, if you were a member of the lodge, you'd get them into that very nicely. But they wouldn't... But these people that have Blue Cross or something like that, then they don't care for this little one that the lawsuit would have for them. Although I think Illinois has got a much better plan than what we... a bigger plan than what we have. You can take insurance down there, so it's pretty worthwhile for a hospital. I think the most you can get here for the little bit they pay is probably $290 on a sickness, shall we say. So even if you have raised this hospitalization, there wouldn't have been any benefit either then, because you had to be in like an insurance. That's right. And it was too much. Well, they didn't go into that. You couldn't do that with the volunteer officers. I know the Grand Lodge Executive Board was talking about getting into insurance like the Norwegians had. Sons of Norway. Yeah, Sons of Norway. But that's expensive, too. You've got to pay about $12 a year to belong, and then you've got to pay your insurance on top of that. We're too low on our dues and all the way down. You can't... you don't have enough money to work with. They just raised us $75 now, you know. What's that going to do to us? It's a question, right? The district needs more money, too. Sure. The district needs money, too. And you've been able to operate in the district lodge because you had a certain amount of interest that you were using to operate the really... No, you're not going to have that because the fund is going down on account of the people passing away. So there it goes. Now you've got to learn to figure out a way of raising your dues or something. That's out of my problem now. That was problems we had years ago and didn't do it. They should have. You probably would get a different class of members if you had to pay $12, $15, right? For $5 or $6, you'd get a different group. Yes. You can't be too cheap, I don't think. That's not good. You've got to be certain. No, it's got to be... You can't be too high either because then you only get the other type. You get the top cream, and that's no good. So it's hard to... Hard to do what to do.... communicate it to all... You can't. You can't. I don't know what... Of course, California out there, as far as I can see, they've got a younger membership than we have by far, all the way down the line. They have some old-timers, but there's a lot more young ones. By that I mean 40, 45, and 50. But they have the climate with them. They can have... Oh, yes, they can have doings all year long where we are...... and it's canceled there. No, but you can have... You see, we have doings in the wintertime. Sometimes we have to cancel a thing. Yeah, because of the heaving and the... Sure.... the sandstorm. Yeah. You get a snowstorm, and you just don't get nowhere. That's often. So you have something, and you've got it all lined up, and you're going to have it... You've spent money to do it, and you've got to cancel it for a week or ten days, and then you've lost the credit because they have something else for the next week. A joint installation, you know, that's usually in February. Yeah. You never know. Well, we've had it, so we were going to have it on a certain Sunday, and we had to do it a week later. How about the Norwegian settlements now? Did they join the Vasa in Minnesota? Well, we have, I think, quite a few Norwegians in our lodge. Straight Norwegians, both husband and wife? Both, yeah. Right. Yeah. Well, I guess maybe most of them are either married... One Norwegian married a Sweden, and that's why they get together in Vasa, although they are Norwegian. No, we have some members that are just full Norwegians. I have a new member that's coming in in our next meeting, and she is half Norwegian and half Swedish right now through her parents. We met her on Swinskiner's Dog up in Mendenhall Falls and talked to her about the archives and the heritage and all that stuff, and she wanted to get in. Of course, we don't have a meeting until September. We have picnics in the summertime. How about the other groups in the area, for example, Gustav and Isidore for Svenska Bröderna? Well, of course, they've got the Svenska Sällskapet. Svenska Sällskapet, yeah. Yeah, that meets down at the Swedish Institute, of course, when they have a... I guess they meet once a month down there. I think they do. That's businessmen, and they have a dinner or something, and they have a catered dinner. I don't think it's just a matter of getting together and talk over what troubles they have in business. It's a different class of people again, see? It ain't the help, it's the bosses that are there. And the Gustavus Adolphus? Well, they've got their building, and that's a good group. And they also have the hospitalization plan. Yeah, they have their own hospitalization plan, but it's one lodge, one club. They charge more dues, too. Yeah, they charge dues, and they've got a good building there, too, and they're renting that out. I think it's going pretty good. So are they gaining members or losing? Oh, I think they're about the same as the rest of us. They're holding their own. I don't think any of them are gaining. Do you think that the Masons are gaining members right now? Are they? No, I don't think so. You don't hear people getting into it very often nowadays. So the young people, they have a different idea of getting it. They're not interested. You don't get them until they're around 30 or so. Then they start thinking of the heritage or something. Or you get them under 16 or before they go into college. It seems like that's when they like to be in the group. But when they go into college and then they get married, they seem to fade away for a while. Either they raise a family or earn enough money to come and belong again or whatever. You never know. Get established, shall I say. Then they'll come back and join the Lodge. So it's a hard thing to tell. And then the TV, of course. Well, yes, I think probably that... People getting lazy. For a while, when TV first came in, I think that stopped a lot of this club business. You know what happened in the 50s when they first came in with TV? You just lost... I mean, people didn't come. Did you see them at the meetings? Sure, you could see them at the meetings. They'd stay at home to see a certain show. We even probably did that, I think. But now... We always went to meetings. I think we always went to meetings. It didn't make any difference. But... They're not all dedicated members, is he? No, they don't all make up their mind they're going to get there. In other words, if they've got something else to do that's better, we'll do it. Either watch TV or go to some other show or what have you. So you both became very interested from childhood, so to speak. Well, see, both our parents were... All of our parents were in the WASA members. And when we got old enough to get in, we were in like Flynn right away. So your parents were there also, shorter members of the club? Yeah, his... Not chartered, but they belonged to Toronto. Matter of fact, her dad was chairman of the Toronto Lodge when we joined. So he was one of the members that... He got a prize for taking in the most members that year or something, I remember. Because we got a whole bunch of kids along with us to start that team. That's right. That was 1927. So you had no trouble to break apart... I mean, because of WASA, you were both enjoying it and participating in it. We'd done that all our lives. Yeah. See, we've been to every Grand Lodge meeting now since 1950. Every one of them. Every one of them. I was a member of them for 54, 58, 62, and 66. In 70, I was in Minneapolis, and then I was out of it. But in 74, we went to Calgary as just visitors. In 78, we went to Newport. And now in 82, we went to Seattle. And now in 86, we were in New York. We hoped to get to San Francisco. You joined hands at every meeting. It was different than the boys from Amsterdam and Amsterdam. No, he didn't stay at the meetings. Of course, he was pretty well interested in that. He was a Shriner, too, and he was in Basin, too. Oh, I see. And he got into that. He was on the way up, I think, when he passed away, while he was probably on the ladder going up to be potentate. But I don't think he would have made it. It takes a long time to get there, you know. You have to work your way up. So his wife was adjusted to that? Well, she didn't like the idea that he was in both places and not at home, you know. Take care of the kids a little bit. They were young at that time. So he did not participate too much with Vasa then after he had... Well, he was glad to see that I would take care of the Vasa part of it and he could take care of the Shrine, see. So he was an older fellow then? Well, yeah, he was 10, 12 years older than I was, more than that. He was 65 when he died, and that was 63. So I guess he was older. Well, maybe not. Yeah, he was about 10, 12 years older. Yeah. So of the grandmasters you have served with or others, so to speak? Oh, yeah, we served under Carl W. Carl W. Johnson and Eltz Johnson and... Carl W. Johnson, Eltz Johnson, Ellis Hillner. Which one was the most forceful, you think, in your opinion? Mr. Vogt was also one of my grandmasters, but he was ill quite a bit then. But he's still living, though? Oh, yes. He wasn't able to come this year because he's older than I am, shall I say. But, see, Eltz Johnson substituted for Vogt in... He was the most active, I think. Eltz Johnson. Yeah, Eltz took it for two times. And one of the reasons also that I didn't go ahead and be a grandmaster or want to be, first one, she didn't want to handle all the Swedish. And, of course, the Swedish letters would get pretty good. I mean, you'd have to do a lot of answering. So when I took the vice, Eltz Johnson and Ellis Hillner said... I told them, no, I won't do that because I can't handle the Swedish end of it. Well, we'll take care of that for you. So I said, okay, you take care of the Swedish and I'll go for vice. If I ever get grandmaster, you have to take care of the Swedish. They both passed away before I got to be 1970. They were gone, so there you are. I didn't have the ones that were going to help me. They went out on you. No. You couldn't do it. How about Berthold, though? Well, Berthold, yeah, but he was working on his own project and the archives was there, and that was much better for him to take care of that. He was closer to it. And he was closer to it. I think they had an idea that it would be down there. We talked about moving it up and having it nearby the institute here, but we would be lost in the big thing. You couldn't do it and it wouldn't be worth it up here. You've got our Swedish institute here, and a little Vasa building alongside wouldn't have been very good. And then also a downtown location is not that safe either. No. This out here, you're pretty safe. You're not going to get— Where I went to school was all white, and now it's entirely different. It's just like in South Chicago where they had that building for the Vasa. No, 74 and Hoyt. Right. And they had that for a long time. That was a Swedish area. Well, after a while, you couldn't be there really. It didn't feel like being there anyway. I don't know if it would make any difference, but it just doesn't work out. Changing neighborhoods. Changing neighborhoods. And I don't think Bishop Hill will ever get changed. That's kind of a thing. It will probably stay the same. I think so. Yeah, I don't think it will grow too far, but they have interesting things going on there three or four times a year, and that's about all they need. If you go back now to your parents, your dad, what kind of work was he doing when he came here? Well, he was— When he got over, he got acquainted with my mother's brother-in-law who was a coal company, or president of a coal company here, and he got a job in the office there as a waymaster, Flower City Coal and Oil. What was your mother's— Ekstrom. Ekstrom. J.D. Ekstrom was my uncle. He passed away when he was quite young. I'd say he might have been about 45. I think it was. I don't remember what it was. And then we— So that was where I was working when I first came out of school, but I soon went in— After I got through, then I went with the contracting business. We were in the insurance business. That isn't insurance, but insurance fire repairs is what we did. We would make an estimate for the insurance company, and if the fellow didn't have a— They might take the money and do their own repairing, or they might ask us to do it, and then it was a good deal, see? We had a lead-in to get into a place and get to fix the place up. So I was kind of an estimator on that. They'd burn the inside of a house, and we'd fix it up. And if you had the house and your house burnt, the adjuster would come and say, Well, now we can fix your house for so much. You can have this company do it, or you can take the money and get someone else to do it. A lot of times they'd take the money and probably fix the house up to their satisfaction. If we did it, we had to fix it up to a pretty good, perfect shape, or we were out of luck. That's the kind of work we were doing. So you were in the contracting business? Yeah, we were in the contracting business. We had about 14 of them working for us, carpenters and painters, and we would sublet the plumbing and the cement work. Cement, we didn't have very much because that didn't burn. What was the name of the company? Anderberg Company. Anderberg Company. Yeah, it was his company. Oh, our Anderberg Company. Still operating. His son is still doing the same thing. But that was what we did. So he's the only one who came from Sweden then? Well, yeah, I'd say so. He was in the war during the First World War, and I think he was in the engineers in that war, and I got a lot of ideas how to do things. He was a bricklayer, really, when he came over from Sweden. Mason. So he was in that, and then he got into the business and owned the operating business himself. And then Helen worked for IDS for 41 years. I got my job in 1929, just before the Depression. Right then, the Depression. Helen was working for a forgery company, and that went bluey in 29. Some fellow that was working in the forgeries was working in the best diversified service, and she went over and saw him and got a job from there on, in the Treasury Department. So he was never laid off then during the Depression? Was it easier for a woman to get a job than a man during the Depression? No. I was just lucky enough to know this fellow when I went to apply there. He worked at Fossey, and so did I, and he came over to IDS, and he was hiring, so he knew me, so I got in. So it helps to know somebody. Oh, yeah. That's all over the world, I think. You know the right people, it helps. It opens the door. Right. But there were tough times, though, for... Oh, yeah, 1930. That was pretty slow times. Although it didn't harm us any. We were both working. Sure. In those days, for 25 cents, you could have a whole evening's worth of fun. You can't do it anymore. You notice what you've got to pay to go to the fair, and when you go into the fair, then you've got to pay $9 or $10 to sit and look at somebody on a stage. Well, in those days, we could do it for 25, 50 cents. And it took a nickel, you'd get on a streetcar, and you'd go to St. Paul and back for 5 cents. Ha! That's different. Of course, you didn't have cars and television and homes and everything else to take care of, either. So that's... So it was different times. Oh, yeah. But a lot of Swedes then at that time were in... Oh, we have a lot of Scandinavians and Swedes here right now, and it's just... I don't know. They've got a good lot of people that belong to the American Swedish Institute. But that's just to help the thing. I think they like to see that it's helped. The dues and so on are pretty high, but still they have a lot of members. Of course, they have that flight that goes to Sweden, but that can't take in all the membership. You get some that'll join just to go on the flight, and then they drop out after that. They have several flights though. Oh, yes, they have several flights. I think they have six or seven of them during the summer. So they get a few extra books there for... Well, I imagine they must have a kickback on that. At least a lot of members. But only paper members for a few months. Well, that sometimes turns out to be a paper member for just a few months. Of course, I've belonged there ever since... I don't know how long. I guess since... My dad and my uncle were really in on it in 1929 when they... When Svan Törnblad turned it over to a bunch of Swedes. Do you remember Svan Törnblad? I know who he was. I've seen him. But I never knew him. He was in a different class. He was chauffeur-driven cars, and he was... Her dad was a chauffeur. For him? No, no. For Gale, for Pillsbury's daughter. Pillsbury? Crosby, Pillsbury. He was a chauffeur for Mrs. Gale, who was a Pillsbury's daughter for several years. And she passed away, and then he got a job with John Crosby, who was with the Wadsworth Crosby Company. So he was chauffeuring him the last few years of his life, until he retired. I guess he retired when he was 72 and he lived to 91, wasn't that the way? So the Pillsbury family, they was the big... Oh, yeah, Pillsbury Flour Mills and the Wadsworth Crosby Company. The flour companies were the big companies back in those days. They still are, but I think they're all over the country now. And they're more diverse right now. Sure. So he was a chauffeur, he was dead in many years? Oh, yeah. He had a house out where the freeway goes through to Franklin Avenue and Fifth Avenue there. Oh, dear. That's where he had a... the chauffeur's home was, and it had a garage on the first floor for three cars and a turntable in it. He had two Rolls Royce and a Piers Aero in those days. We didn't get to ride in those. Oh, no, we didn't get to ride in those. You couldn't even touch them. So that was his style. Yeah, that was quite a stylish place. Mrs. Geale lived on... just about right across the park from the Art Institute there on Second Avenue and 21st Street, I think it is, or 22nd. Could he really be that wealthy on the Swedish paper, Turnblad? Well, I think he had other ways of making money. He had railroad stocks? Investments and things that made him money, too. But they had a lot of business. And I think the advertising probably paid off well, too. Sold more stuff to the younger Swedes by having an ad in the Swedish paper at that time than probably the local paper. But then it didn't take these people to learn English so they could read the ads and know what was going on without the Swedish paper. Just like now, they don't get the business now, it's just a heritage now. That's right. Yeah. But it was about 40,000 issues, I think, or circulation. But that doesn't sound like it would make an awful lot of money. At that time, though, probably... Well, yeah, 40,000, but I don't think it was only about 10 or 15 cents a copy per day. There was a lot of pages, though, a lot of advertising. Oh, yes, you see, the advertising is what paid them off. Sure. I'm sure that's what pays this one off now. Probably is. Sure. What struck me funny, I was up in Michigan and we bought a Detroit Free Press for 15 cents. Just as big a paper as this, made in Detroit, and we bought it in Marquette. 15 cents. It was another name, but out of Detroit. Yeah, the Detroit News, I think. Detroit News, but the Detroit Free Press was 20 cents. This is, what, 30 cents now. How can they do it for 15 cents? They must have a better rate at advertising, huh? Oh, well. So did you have any Swedish papers, paper in your home? No, no, we never took the post. No? No. We didn't read too much Swedish. How about Aristana Luthren? Aristana. Yeah, I belonged to the Swedish church. I think I was. You received that. Yeah, but I didn't have any. No Swedish paper? No. I don't remember. I don't think so. We got the church paper. That was in Swedish when it was Swedish, but it changed to English when it changed over. So that, my Swedish paper I get now is when I get letters from Sweden once in a while about. Of course, my grandparents lived with us, and they couldn't talk anything but Swedish. Well, I know, sure, but that was when we were younger, too. Yeah, but then they died when I was like 12 or so. 12 or 13 years old. So then we never spoke of him very much. Not very much. But we've still been interested in Swedes up off, even so. That's why we need a lot more people that are not talking Swedish that could be interested in it, too. How about this Sjölund? Is Vasa interested in that? Oh, yeah. Well, yeah, they are. Are we more ahead of Detroit Lakes? Well, Grand Lodge has got scholarships up there, and we've, several of our, John Morton has sent three of their kids up with a, you know, they just give them a help. In other words, they... They stay there a few weeks, then? Yeah, their kids go up and stay there for two, three weeks. And I think it's going on pretty good. I think we have our, our delegate now is going to be the youth director for the United States and Canada, Harold Wybie. And he only lives about, his farm is about 30 miles away from Sjölund. So I think it's what he, when he talked to Carl Lindquist down in New York about different things going, why he happened to mention that he was so close. He goes down to Sjölund and talks to the kids that are there. He's a schoolteacher in Hibbing. So that might be a good job for him. He might get to know a lot of the young folks up there. So he's going to be with the Voss Order? Yeah, he's going to be the Voss Order youth director for the United States and Canada. Yeah. They have one in Sweden. Yes. Yeah, he's... There was a lady from California that was at last term. I can't remember what her name was now, Johnson or somebody? I can't place it. Yeah, there was a lady. I know, but it's on a slip in there. I always have to look that up and remember. How about the politics now in Minneapolis and all? Did the Swedes, have they participated? Oh, yeah. Was there more so before your time, or do you remember any? No, it's way back. Way back? I don't think... Why were they not interested in the 40s and 50s, though, the Swedes? It seems that they have the same thing in Rockford. They seem to lose the grip about politics. They don't... They're not interested in it. They don't go after it as hard as it. Why do you think that is that? I don't know. I don't know that, but I can find that in this state here, you go Republican one time and Democrat another time. Oh, I see. So there's no straight... You can't always tell which way it's going to go. There must be a lot of independents that do just what they think they want to do, you know? By person, not by the party. It seems that way. They have a kind of an interesting one now. The Democrats are fighting in the primary, and so are the Republicans, and in a little while it will be between the two, see? Of course... Oh, you had Wendell Anderson here, though. Oh, yeah. He was here for quite a while. I'm trying to remember whether he was a Democrat or a Republican. I think he was a Democrat, wasn't he? Democrat. I think so. Then we had LeBander here, but he was a Republican. That was in the 70s. Freeman was here. Freeman. He was a Democrat. Then we had Cui for quite a while, and he was a Republican, and he was a Norwegian. And now we got... Purpich. He's from the mines up here. I think he's Finnish, isn't he? I think so. I don't know. I don't know. Maybe I'm wrong. Maybe I'm wrong about that. There are a few of them that... Oh, there's... Not any of them belong to Vasa that I know of. No, no. Never had any... I don't think any politician belonged to Vasa. I don't think so. Not in our state. They didn't care if you had votes? No. Probably didn't have enough votes. But there's usually a politician in Vailuotu.