 Yeah, it is the 10th of September 1986 and I'm sitting together with Mr. and Mrs. Arnold Stavrund in Rockford, Illinois. And you Arnold were born 1912, 2nd of September in Axtel, Kansas. Axtel, Kansas, huh? Can you tell me a little bit about your father in law, Lars Stavrund? He was also born there. He was born in Axtel and he was quite a strong leader in the church there, in the covenant church in Axtel. So his parents or your grandparents, they came from Sweden? They came from Sweden. Do you know from where in Sweden? No, I don't know that. No. But some of your uncles were born in Sweden? They were all born in Sweden. Except your father. My father, then he had one sister who was married to an orange quist in Minneapolis, Minnesota. And your parents, did they have a farm out there? They had a farm, we had a farm, right east of the covenant church in Axtel. And your mother was the daughter of the minister of the covenant church? That's right, Reverend J. William Johnson. And they came from Chicago? They came from Chicago. So then she had to become a farm wife? That's right. How did that work out? She adopted herself alright. She died when she was 45, I guess she must have overworked, I don't know. That was hard work. Oh yeah, that's right. So your dad, did he buy that farm or rent it at first? Well, they homesteaded it down there. And then he finally bought it from the rest of the kids down there. So it was 160 acres? 160 acres, right east of the church. And it was a good farm then? Oh yeah, that was good. We made a living at it, but I got homesick for long-winded company in Illinois, so that's why I moved up here. So you were raised there on that farm? Oh yes, born and raised there. And went to school there? Went to school there, and the schoolhouse is still there, but it's almost dilapidated now, but it's still there. There's nothing left of the property where we lived. They've torn it all down, made a file out of it. You were not affected though with this, Marietta Dahl, if you remember? No. You're too far north. Yeah, we're a little bit north, but I've been there several times. You didn't have those storms and flooding problems there? We were on higher ground, so we didn't have any trouble with the storms or flooding. How many kids were you in the family, your dad and your mother? You mean? How many kids were you, sisters and brothers? Oh, I had one brother and one sister. So you had three kids then? Three kids in my family. So were you the oldest one? I'm the second. Second one. My brothers are oldest and my sister, she was the youngest, but she passed away ten years ago now. So when you were growing up, you had a brother as a boss then? Oh, I know. He taught you what to do? Yeah, I guess so. You both helped out in the farm? Oh, yes. My mother died when she was 45 and I was 16, so I had to take over and my sister was 11. So I was a cook and a dishwasher and everything then, because we were living out in the country then and didn't have much chance or choice. But you were also leading off in the fields too, weren't you? Oh, sure. You had two jobs then? I had two jobs. Beside after I got 18, then my dad and my brother and I and another man, we formed a quartet and we went all over around down there and sang. Went to Abilene and sang over the radio in Topeka. What was the name of your quartet? We didn't have a name for it, we just, the Axel Kovner Male Quartet is all. Was that through the church then? Oh, yes. So you went to the different churches then? Oh, yeah. And then I was choir director for 10 years. How did you learn to do this now? Did somebody in the church teach you to do it? Oh, I was just a natural, I guess. I never had any education for that, for music, but we had a lot of, we never missed an Easter cantata or Christmas cantata. They were all willing to help and we all pitched in and made a pretty good success of it. This seems to be contagious in Kansas where they're singing, like in Lynchburg they have this messiah. Oh, yeah, Messiah, Mesberg, yeah. Brantford, they're a musical church too. Yes. Clyde is another one, isn't he? Clyde. Randolph and Cleburne. Do you know Ed Nord? Yes. No, I don't. You don't know him? He's a tenor singer and he sings for every funeral down there, I think, yet, and he's getting up there now. Your parents, though, were they interested in taking part in singing? Oh, yeah, they used to play guitars and go out and sing. So you learned to play guitar for your... Oh, a little bit, but that never mattered so much. I used to play piano, but now I've lost all practice on that, so... So that was your upbringing as a young boy then, to be in this quartet and travel around? Oh, yeah. You had an old T-4 then? A Model T-4, then Model A-4, and a Pontiac. One time we went to Abilene, we were going to sing over the radio, and my brother had bought a second-hand Pontiac. We got halfway down there, the thing stalled on us, but we got it going again, and we got down there, and we had two minutes to get to the microphone, and one of the fellow met us at the door, and he said, Get going, you belong over here. So I had greasy hands and worked on the car, and played the piano, and my brother and I sang, and Reverend Albert preached. So you made it? Oh, we just made it by two minutes. Man, that was the closest I've ever been for... So at that time you had to be a Jack of all trades? Oh, Jack of all trades, yeah, that's right. That did me good, though, that was a good education. Oh, and you had to carry some spare parts, too? Oh, sure. And a lot of flat tires, I suppose. Oh, sure. So you took Route 36 then west, and then on to... To Abilene. Abilene, yeah. Oh, yeah. Topeka was only 75 miles, so we used to sing there, transcribe it, and then we'd hear it ourselves on the following Sunday morning. Oh, I see. How long did you do this? Oh, it was a couple years, and then, what was his name, that pastor, what was his name again? I forget now what his name was, but he passed away then, and God died away. So he was the leader, huh? Oh, yeah, he was the boss. So the pastor did a good service then for you? Oh, he met, yeah, we enjoyed it. Occupied them, and... That's right. How about the wintertime, though, when the weather was bad and... No, that didn't bother too much. They had pretty good roads at that time of the day, too. You got used to it then? Oh, yeah. So you were not afraid to go out and get stranded? No, no. Yeah, but how could you fix a flat in the wintertime, for instance, if you got one? They only had a spare, you know, so we got by that way. But it was not terrible bad, though. They had pretty good tires at that time, too. They had? So there was a few years earlier, then they really had problems. That's right, yeah. And did any of your kids now in your family go to... You went to high school then? No, I never did go to high school. So you helped out on the farm? I had a farm. That was the crops. That was the way of life them days, you know. And your sister the same way? No, my kids, they went to high school. You mean like your sister? Oh, no, she went to high school. She completed high school. My brother didn't. So your brother, did he move away from the farm then? He moved up here, so he's been here about 40 years, I imagine, by now. Why did you move out east, I mean to Illinois? Well, I don't know. It seemed to... I never did make too much money down there. So you were farming on your own then? Oh, yeah. After you got married? Oh, yeah. But we just never got anywhere. Every other year we'd have a dry crop or dry season. Well, it takes two years to pick up that one year that you lost, you know. So I never did get anywhere. My brother, he was doing pretty good up here. And I kind of thought it would be a pretty good place for my two kids to come up here. If they didn't want to go to college, they could go to factories or they could get some other job. There wasn't much opening down there for that. So they were born and on the farm? Oh, yeah. And then we moved up here and then we farmed for eight years up here. So you still had farming in your blood? Oh, yeah. How about your wife now? You were also born down there in Frankfurt. Yeah. Am I supposed to say anything? Sure. No, I didn't think so. Well, our daughter is real musical. She started when she was four years old. And she played in our church here, the first free church for 15 years, played both piano and organ when we were down in the old church. And then she did some over here too. But now she plays at First Assembly. Do you have musical background in your family? Oh, yeah. We both have. So you belong to the same church then? Yes. That's how you met then, through singing and youth work? We were just raised together. We were born and raised in the same community. So when you married then, the farming was the stepping stone for your life? You knew exactly where you were getting into it. Our parents were farmers, and we just, I guess we thought there was nothing. Well, there wasn't anything else out there. But LeVon went to North Park College, and Kenneth went to Rock Valley, and he's a draftsman. He is a draftsman at Ingersoll Factory. And, of course, my daughter is married. Their last child went to college. Now, they have four in college this fall. They got their hands full. That's right. And one of them is going to Jerry Falwell. Yes. And she loves it. It's tremendous. So if you compare now with the rest of your friends down there that went to church, did they stay in the area, or did they also move out? They must have stayed there, but they've been passing away, so they're not. Because it's always hard to move a farmer. Oh, yeah. He has his feet down in the ground, and you can't get them out of the way, or they don't even notice you. Most of the young people left down there. They're in Topeka, and they're in Kansas City, and some of them went to Washington. The Lindquist family moved to Washington, and all the houses down there are empty. And we have very few people at our church anymore. So you saw quite early, and there was no future in farming. That's right. I was 38 when I moved up here, though. 38? That's tough. Yeah, I had to do it there or never. Did you both decide, then, that you would all agree with your family to? Yeah. How about the kids, though, because they were old and not doing well? Well, they had a little hard time adjusting. I felt kind of bad because LaVonne got so sick the first night we were here, and we thought she ran a terrible high fever, and we thought there was something terribly the matter with her. We called a doctor at midnight, and he said, Well, you know, I can't find anything wrong with her, but I think she's probably just homesick for her home in Kansas. Home? Oh, she is? And I felt so bad. Well, she was in the eighth grade. Oh, I see. So that was all to it. She was 14, 13, between 13 and 14. When we got up here that night, she said, This isn't home. I'm not going to stay here. Oh, and then when Kenneth went to the bathroom, I don't know what struck him in there, but he came out and he said, Mother, this isn't home. And I felt so bad. I thought I'd really done something terrible. But there's nothing left down there in Kansas anymore. My sister and her husband go to church there. She was a Bible teacher for 40 years there, but now she's had several strokes, and she's just practically disabled. She just isn't able to do even her own work. But very few families left in church. So you had this 160 acres. You bought your brother out there. In other words, you were the owner of the farm then. No, that was my father's, my dad's place. No, I never owned a farm down there. Did he still live there when you moved up here? Yes, uh-huh. He mostly lived with my sister and Link in Nebraska at that time, though. So you had to sell out the livestock and... Everything, everything. Horses and tractors and cows. Moved everything up here. What you need is some of the implements up here. Yeah, I took some of them, but I had a public sale down there and sold off most of it. Tell them how you moved. We had a great big trailer truck, and we put all our furniture in there, and I had a brand-new tractor, and I didn't want to sell that, so I kept that. What make was that? An Alishomra tractor. And then I had a wheat drill, and I had a mower, and we put that all in one great big truck, and moved up here for $250. You couldn't do it now. You couldn't do it. What year was that? 1956. And you moved then to outside Rockford or north of Rockford? North of Rockford on Latham Road. Did it still belong to Rockford, the place, or you have a different address up there? No, the same address. It was only five miles north of town. How did you pick that place out? Well, my brother picked it out. I tried to come up here at two different times besides that, and when I moved up here, he called me up and said, there's a farm north of town, and he said, I'm sure you can get it. So I jumped on the bus and came up here and seen it, and I liked it. It was for sale? No, I rented it again. I had never owned a farm, but I own my home now. You didn't want to take a chance then of buying it? No, and so I moved up here, and I farmed there for eight years. Well, my kids didn't care for farming. My mom did, and she liked to drive the tractor. She did all my extra work on the tractor. She just loved it, but Kenny didn't care for it. So I thought, well, why stay out here? So I had a sale here and moved to town. I worked for Rockford Polyx then for two years, and I got a better job at Commercial Wire, and I worked there then for eight years, or ten years. So your brother, now, he... He's farmed all the time up here. He did? He's still farming. So he was interested to have you up here, I suppose. Well, I suppose. He came up here, and he had done pretty good, and I told him I wanted to come up here, so he helped me get a place up here. So he also rented the... Oh, yes....in the same area around here? Yeah, he's right east of town by Argyle. So he could give you some hints then how to convert to being... Oh, I guess so, yeah. That dairy farming, that was a little bit... Arnon was always a real good farmer. Did you have dairy farming, too? Oh, yes, I dairied up here. I milked up to 32 cows. But you say the wheat, you couldn't use up in the north. You didn't plant any wheat up here? Well, we used it for oats. Oats instead? No wheat? No wheat. I didn't raise any wheat. They raise wheat now, though, so they can raise a little wheat up here. In Kansas, they were... Oh, that was wheat. But I didn't raise much wheat down there. I had mostly corn. But I dried out every year. I never got a crop. I had 30-some cattle in a pasture there. I bought up during the winter and had them in a pasture. And it just got so dry, there was no pasture, so I had to sell them. I got $1.34 a piece for them when I sold them after keeping them and all that work. And the irrigation was not in at that time? No, not down... not in the neck of the woods, no. They moved on, like in Nebraska, there's a lot of irrigation there. Oh, yeah. They also moved on to... There's some in Kansas, but they generally have to take it out of the rivers. There's no... not up in the... Not the shore water there? No, not where we're at, no, or where we're at. I see, so you couldn't do anything... But when we were down there, that was unheard of, irrigation, you know. They just didn't have anything like that. They started a little bit later. They just started it in the last 10, 15 years, haven't they? But there was a lot of investment, now. It doesn't make it all good, no. That's why I left the farm up here, because I figured if I have to buy a grain dryer and all these expensive combines, I thought I better get out because I got a little money, so I moved to town, and I'm pretty glad I did. So, but you have some friends who stayed on down there. How did they...? I have no relatives myself, but my wife has relatives. What about some of your neighbors that stayed on? Oh, yeah, they stayed down there. They made it, I guess, but they inherited some of it, you know. That's what helped them out. So they could survive, but there's no savings account to the bank account. No. So, but their kids, they also move out then to other places. Oh, yeah. There are very few young people anymore. They've moved out. It's the older ones living there now. Did some of the young people go to Kansas City and St. Joseph? Well, there's some up into Iowa and Minnesota. There's quite a few in Minnesota. Why did they go to Minnesota? Well, I guess maybe they had relatives, you know, and things like that. So you started out here in Illinois then in eight years as a farmer. Uh-huh. And how long did it take for you to plant your thoughts, you know, on the future on the ground here? I mean, there was adjustments that had to be made. Well, there was a little adjustment, but it was, I've been a farmer all my life, so I kind of just worked right into it. Never bothered me much. And your brother, was he living too? He was daring too. Was he close to you? No, he lived down by Belvedere, south of Belvedere. So we was 30 miles apart, but it was kind of hard to get adjusted with the people, you know. People were different. Oh, yeah, a little different. We were all Swedes. I didn't know each other, you know. Were they more hectic and rushy here or? Oh, I don't know. It was almost rushing wherever you were at now in America, you know. Yeah, but Kansas was more. Oh, yes. It was more slow or pace. Slow or pace. So you noticed that. How about for you now, Mrs. Staublin, how was the women in Illinois compared to Kansas? Oh, well, it's more society, you know. It was more down to earth where you came from, Kansas. In Kansas, yes. I think here the young people separate themselves from the old people. Down there, the young people would visit with the old people just as well. They didn't separate themselves, but they do up here. So they were interested to listen to you older people. But here it was a... But it isn't that way anymore. It's that southern hospitality that's the difference. How about the church now? Wasn't that a common uniting body though? We had a good church down there, though. You knew each other down in the Ext. of course. But here it was too big to know each other. The culture is different. Well, I don't know. I tell you, it's hard to bring your children from a small place to a large place. And where the kids have been born and raised into the church, they're together all the time. They don't accept outsiders like they should. What do you think, though, in Rockford? The families aren't together so much. We're trying to do that in our church now. We're trying to get the families together. We've been separated too long. When you go in church, one goes here, one goes there, and the parents go somewhere else. The children never hear what the parents are talking about or what they have. And it's a separation. But now I know they were talking last week. They've got to get the families together. Donnie, your home church now in Ext. Kansas, you still in the 1950s had the old tradition of families sitting in the same pew and we're all together. Yes. We sat together. They didn't separate themselves from the parents. There was no nursery classes or... Oh, yes, it was bad. Here they had them in different rooms and you'd not see them until you come out two hours later. But see, the churches are so big that when you go in, you don't even know hard to where they are because there's so terrible many Sunday school classes. And it's just done on such a big scale, everything anymore, like when you have one minister, now we got nine. So it's just an altogether different setup. How about your children? Can you still see some Kansas life in them? Well, they had a background, but I know my daughter just told me last week because they are in a cell group at First Assembly that they have a Bible study at their home every Thursday night through the winter. In the summer, they don't have it. But in the winter, they have it and they've had like up to 40 people in their home. And I don't know, it's just I think those cell groups are good because then groups of people get together and they have a lawyer that teaches them that he's only been saved about eight, ten years and he's just tremendous as a teacher. Well, this is the assembly of God. My daughter, they left our church and went there and our son left our church and went to a smaller church. They live up by Roscoe. So you were a covenantor so down in Nexdell and then you joined the free church. You had two covenant churches here. Why didn't you join one of Woodrow? We started in the covenant church when we first moved to Romford and LeBron said, well, I like Reverend Erickson so well and he was preaching at the free church. So we decided, well, if the children want to go there, we'll go there. It's better that we do as they would like to have us do than do as we want to do. Well, he was there for about 25 years, but then I think that it just, well, it's just a difference, you know. I think it's hard to come from a small place and get in with the kids at a bigger church because they're each used to their own group and they don't accept new people like they should. So you have to adjust. Sometimes it's a hard pill to swallow. Like the free church now, they are more open than the covenants. Oh, yes, I think so. We like the free church. The covenant church here, the first covenant on Woodrow, they've got a wonderful minister now, Reverend Johnson, and he has wonderful Bible studies for the women one day a week. They start in the fall and it runs through the winter. And he has women coming from all churches. So there are no free churches down there in the area? No, which town? There's no free churches. In Kansas. It's up in Phelps County, Nebraska. Yeah, that's about 150 miles north of where we lived, you know. So did you have any conjunction, so to speak, or visitation with the churches in Nebraska? Not too much. We were generally with Brantford. You see, we were 100 miles from Lincoln, Nebraska. So we generally associated with Brantford and Randolph, Cleburne. You didn't go north of Nebraska? Not too much, no. We did. We had some there, in Lincoln, but not north of Lincoln. So you made a move and when you look back on it, you are not regretting it? No, I don't regret it, no. There were many stalls to turn over, but... We did it for the kids' sake, and it seemed like the kids made it good in business, and then also they're both Christians, so that counts. So why did they transfer over to De Samte Gada? Did your daughter marry the man from that church? No. Well, no, he was covenant, but he wanted to go there because they just, I don't know, they just felt like they... Well... They just liked the minister better over there. So when you see all those churches now on Alpine Road and Belford Road, there's a tremendous number of them, a bigger and bigger village. Yeah. And when you see the Kansas countryside, how do you see religion? Was it better religion down there compared to the city? The religion was the same, but it seemed like the farmers, they bought other farms and people moved out, so there's nobody left down there. The Lutheran church down there used to be a good-sized church, but now they're just about the size of our church, and that's only a mile apart. They're just not... They're not over 30 or 40 people that come to our church anymore on Sunday morning, not even that at night. And they don't discuss to go together? No, they haven't decided to go together yet. When you were growing up, there was a difference between the two. Oh, I should say, yeah. There was no way to... No, you couldn't budge them old-timers. How about you young people, though? Did you think about it as a stubborn idea? No, we just kind of bought up that environment. You know how the Lutherans and the Calvinists was at that time, but now they're together more now. They do things together. So they visit each other? Oh, yeah. And they're waiting to get used to each other. Yeah. Did you have any tent meetings in the forest down there? Not among our denomination, no, but there was evangelists like... What was that man's name from Saline and Lensburg? They used to come up there in Frankfurt and Valais and have tent meetings, and we used to participate in that. Oh, yeah, we used to have a good time with that. But as far as our church, no, and the Coven didn't have much. Because the people around there, they were already in church, you know. Oh, yeah. It was the way to win the war. Yeah, yeah. And we had conferences, you know. Yes. Like we'd have conferences with all the mission churches. And then we would have ministers come from back to the Bible. We had Reverend Brumfield, he preached a series of sermons on the second coming of Christ for two solid weeks. And we went every night, but... And the church was full. You couldn't get that up here. You couldn't get people to come out like that up here. But we never missed a meeting. I played for church till we left and went to Illinois. I started in when I was 14 years old, and we never missed a service. And if people didn't come to clean the church, we had to go Saturday afternoon and clean the church, and Arnold farmed the ground. And he led the choir. That's the way you do in a small church. To educate them to do as much as possible. When we weren't working at home, we were church working. When we'd have banquets, we would furnish the food and cook the meal, and we never charged anything for it. Nowadays, they have to have money for everything. But have they gone away from this dinner making? They don't do that here at the Rockwell Church, do they? Not too much, no. Not too much. They don't have any lunches or... Not too much, no. Well, they have some, but it isn't like on a bigger scale like we have. And they don't have too many conferences, because there isn't... Well, the Tattle Creek Dam took away all the Cleburne and Randolph Church, and so there is very few churches to get together with. I think maybe they get together like the young people once in a while. And for, you know, different things. And then they have like a singing group came from Brantford, our church, on a Sunday night and sang. But other than that, I don't think they do too much. How about the young people? Are they as dedicated and... If I use the word workaholic as their parents were years ago, I mean, do they like to pitch in and cook? You mean up here? Yeah, in Rockport, I heard. Well, I don't know. I hate to comment on that. The custodian is paid to do it. That's right. They're paid for it. Everybody is paid. The one that cooks in the kitchen, they get paid for every banquet they serve and everything. So there is no labor or love anymore then to... Well, oh well, there's people. So I do. So he inherited some land then, your brother? No, no. He just rants it in farms. And the dairy farming is still good then for him to... Oh, he makes a living at it. It's a good pastime now. This year, all you can call it is a pastime. Takes a year of rest, huh? Yeah, that's right. And his children, are they interested in farming? No, not one of them. Oh, yes. Well, Sarah, they live on a farm, but they're not interested in it. They don't make a living at it. Oh, no. He says... How do you think it will affect the farming now, because you have a tremendous negative attitude against farming on TV, in the news media, and they're telling the young people, get out of there because there is no future. How will that affect the real farm boy now, if he has this mindset? Well, if I was young again, I'd go right back on the farm. You can't beat it for a lifestyle. To go on the farm? Oh, yeah, I'd go back, but I wouldn't spend the money that they're spending nowadays on farming. You don't have to do it. So they have actually been ill-advised then, the young farmers? Well, they've kind of been forced into it on account of the farm equipment has gotten so high, but then the equipment companies have got to have that money because the union is strong in there, so they're going to have to have that much money for their products, too. Like John Deere, if you use the names, it's easier, John Deere International Harvester. Why did they go along with the workers to pay them those wages? Why did they, yeah? They wanted the same machinery. That's right. And the farmers, they paid it. They had to pay it. Well, they were making good money at that time, and now they're not doing it. So their foresight was not that good then for the manufacturing side. No, foresight is bad, but backside is good. But you know, the big word now among the union workers is security. That's right. But the farmer, he has no security. He has no security. Why don't they set those two factions together and find out and have a discussion about it? I don't know. The farmers never could cooperate and stick together. If they stuck together, they could starve us out, us city guys out now. So because there was no security, if you wanted to get the rain in the right time or drop under the roof or anything. No. So there are many, all groups are at fault then more or less. That's right. The unions are probably the one that hogged it away a little bit too greedy. I think so. I think so. I'm a union man myself because I belong to a union, but I work in a factory. How do you feel about all this? Well, it's all right, but it's overdone. It's all right, but it's overdone. Can you sit down and talk with people in Rockford about farming? Do they understand the hardship of it? Not in town. They won't work? We have friends that are farmers now. We generally associate with them that we can talk farming. But you can sit down and have a frank discussion? Oh yes, we can. There are several people here in town. But do they understand the hardships? No, they say, why does the government subsidize the farmer? I always tell them, if you've never farmed in your life, you better not say too much because it's a challenge nowadays. It's a long story. Oh, it's a challenge now. Because now it's life and death. That's right. It's mostly death now. And the government was probably, and the bankers were probably in the fall too. Oh sure, sure. To keep the money circulating. That's all it was after at that time. Now they're paying for it. And the bigger the better. Bigger the better. What hurt a lot of the farmers is they inherited their farms. They got it from their grandparents and didn't have to pay for it. So they were well set. But they were never satisfied with just that acreage. They had to buy more and more and then they lost it all. But don't you think, like in your case, your father, he farmed in certain ways. In other words, he was taught by his father how to do it by his neighbors. And you come along and you saw different ideas. What did you change on your farm when you were farming? Well, not too much. What ideas did you have? Not too much, other than you got some more equipment, you got tractors. And I milked. We didn't milk much that time when I was a kid. But after we got married, I milked down there too, but didn't milk too much. But it was a different lifestyle, you know. But when you bought the tractor, did you overpower the farm with a lot of horsepower you actually didn't need? I mean, you were sensible enough to buy just enough. Just enough to get by on. You didn't buy to have another 500 acres added. No, no. And then you didn't overfarm like they do now. They just get big equipment and farm so much, you know. How about fertilizer, for instance? What? Fertilizer. Fertilizer. Oh, when we farmed down there, we didn't have that down there. Oh, you used the manure. Yeah, used the manure from the cattle and that. But now, you know, there's all fertilizer down there. They can raise just about as good of crops down there as we can up here now through fertilizer. And there is also over down there. Oh, yeah. Yeah. And then they certainly got too much. They can't sell it. That's right. And that's politics, of course. That's politics. And the big guy says, well, all these fertilizer plants, that's the only way they're going to reduce the acreage, or yield, is not use so much fertilizer. Because they can put on more fertilizer and raise more crops. So that's the way that goes. But they can't go down to the smaller areas. No. No, they want the big stuff, you know, like killing themselves. How about co-op in your area? Farmers go together and try to sell commodities without going through the... Well, there's quite a lot of that now. There's the farmers union when we were down there. Were they united, all the farmers? They always say they are. Well, not too much. Not too much. They were always fighting among themselves, you know. They didn't have... They don't trust each other that way. That's right. That's right. Had poor leadership. So in the surrounding area where you lived, you could trust each other, but you didn't trust them in Brantford and Innsbruck and St. Iles? No. That's about right. So, but on the other hand, you have to trust the stockbrokers. That's right. That's right. They tell you exactly what to get. The farmers, they're always... They get what they... They just receive what they get. Show them the mercy. Huh? No mercy. I mean, you are their mercy. Yeah, their mercy all the time. Wasn't that frustrating, though? I mean, you're sitting there and you're working hard every day of the week, and then you sit there and look at the board. How do they come to that conclusion? I mean, the price is supposed to be there. I don't know. I don't know how they do that. No. Just speculations. Just speculation. If somebody gets some idea to buy a few more thousands, then it goes up. That's right. That's right. How about the world hunger now? I mean, I remember years ago, four or five years ago, I would travel to Nebraska. In every church, they had a little bank, a paper box, you know, to put in money for the world hunger. You don't see that today. Oh, yeah. And all you have... And then the corn and the wheat was very expensive. Yeah. And you had to pay for it. Now, you can have it almost for nothing. You don't see any bank boxes. That's right. Why? I don't know. And it... Let me tell you, first assembly gave over $100,000 to buy grain to send to Ethiopia. You know, there's... It was last year. Yeah. And we gave over there because our church didn't have a program for it, so we gave over there. But I think they do it on a different scale now. You know, the churches are more conscious of it, and they do it as a gift from the church. But is that program still going on? I haven't heard anything. Well, first assembly gives to the hungry in Africa. I think they have a fund that is just for that, and people can give into it whenever they want to. And then after, I think then they... Because they could help the farmers that way, you know. Oh, sure. I think the people would help them. Sure, they would. They get a decent price. Because they said, no, to break even, you've got to be over $2 a bushel. Oh, sure. A lot of them got $160 an acre in it before they ever get it to the elevator with the fertilizer. And then the storage you have to pay on top of it. That's right. And then the grain elevator owner, he might reject half of it. Yeah. He says, I'm going to classify this as moldy and mildew and everything. Yeah. So there's a rat race. That's right. There's a surplus of grain, and still people are starving. But then who's going to pay for that grain? Nobody wants to give it. But don't you think the taxpayers... Now you hear this, they are restricting themselves, you know, don't help the farmers because the government is helping them. But if they give it to the poor and the needy of the world, you might get the money that way to the farmers, I mean, to get rid of the crop. Yeah, there's one program on TV where they give $11 and it buys, I forget how much, flour. And that reduces the surplus, of course. Yes. That's going around about a way to get it over there, but that's a good way to reduce the surplus. But I don't know if it's going over or not. There might be something in making. It always takes time before they... That's right. Yeah. They have their own committees on it. I tell you, the Lord, he's got his hand in it all. I think it's going to... something's going to happen, whatever it will be, I don't know. So there are good crops all over the world. That's right. We just come back from Virginia and up to the East Coast and up to Canada, corn and soybeans all over the place. Everywhere, everywhere. And just like you said, the fertilizing is probably overdone. That's right. You got to... But now in the Kansas... I remember in Nebraska, the farmers always there or... drain the south wind from Kansas, because the corn will just go down like this. Yeah. And you had a... Well, we always blamed it on Oklahoma. Oklahoma. And when they came, it was not much to do. Well, if it got them hot winds, now, that just cooked the corn. I had a... The year I moved up here, I had off a good corn crop. And we went to bed, it was 109, was it? When we went to bed, we got up, it was still 109. And I got up and looked over the bottom where I had that good corn, and it was all white. And you could smell the corn like it was burning. You see, you got to have it cool at night, but that night it stayed 109 all night, and it just cooked that corn crop. I told Mom, it's time to move out of here. So that's when we decided we better move. So here is more moist. You don't have... Oh, yeah. Different climate. This is the roast bowl of the United States, around Rockford and right up to here. We never get any drastic storms, and it can just start raining, and you have no... Thunder, lightning? Severe thunderstorms like lightning and thunder. It just starts raining. It's just... It's such a wonderful climate, I think. And it's... I don't know, it hasn't really been hot more than a few days all summer, really hot. So you remember the weather conditions down there? Oh, 1936 to 1938, dried up every year, you know? If it wasn't that, it was grass up. You had your dad's farm then, helping him. Oh, yes. Then I... We wasn't making it. Dad wasn't making it. I said, I'm going to go to Kansas City to get a job. So I went to Kansas City and worked for a coal company there for better than a year to get some money. Got $60.25 a week salary, which is more than I got at the farm. So it was hard to get any spending money on the farm? Oh, nothing to sell. All burned up. So you were affected by the dust fall then? Oh, yeah. Oh, I see. Oh, sure. The year that Arnold and I went to Campwood that we were about 18 years old then, and it was 115 almost all week, and that was the year that all the trees died. No, none of that goes... They just all died. There wasn't even a shade tree anywhere. It was that hot all summer. And they continued for two years in the 30s? Yeah, 36... Well, 35 to about 38. That was really bad. Dad almost lost his farm. He owed $2,000, and he couldn't raise enough money to pay the taxes on it. And my brother, he was lucky enough to get a job on a township running a grade in a tractor, so he paid the taxes to keep Dad's farm and owned only $2,000 on it. So the bank demanded... Oh, sure. You'd lose the farm if you wouldn't pay your taxes, you know. Just like it is now. Oh, those were hard times, I'll tell you. Well, that was the Depression, too, you know. How about the local bank in Exxon? Did they manage to stay afloat? No, they were careful with their money, and they stayed open. We had a good banker there in Exxon, I'll tell you. So he was in the spot, too, though? Oh, sure, sure. He was a shrewd banker. He was good. He knew his business, and they stayed on top through it all. What do you think happened in small towns like in Iowa and also in Kansas, Nebraska, when the banker has to close up on some of the friends? Would it be a hard feeling, or is it just straight business? Because everybody is tight. The banker has his... Everybody's tied up. How did they see the banker, then, as an evil man or as a businessman? I don't know. I don't know how you take that. But he was awful good to me, though, and my dad, too, though. Because he didn't own the farm. The federal land bank owned the mortgage on that farm on $2,000. So he wouldn't have lost any money if Dad would have lost it. But, yeah, they was a good bank. So he didn't have to foreclose on the two? No, no. The only thing I see is my brother working on the township. So there was like a WPA? No, that was maintenance on the roads. Road maintenance. So you didn't have any WPA workers? Yeah, they had some down there, but we never got in on it, though. I never had to go there because I was farming, tried to farm, you know. Because this Turtle Creek Dam, that was in the 60s, then. I don't know what year that was. I was going to ask you if you've seen that one. Have you seen the... Oh, yes, I have. But I tell you, once you've been a farmer, you're more careful with your money. We can see with our children, you know, it comes in easy, but it goes out easy, too. They don't take care of it like we do, like I told Arnold, even now, where we think twice before we spend for something because we've been brought up with never throw away a thing, make use of everything. And my mother was a tremendous cook. She came from Sweden and went to work for a rich family in St. Joe, and she did housework until she got married. But there wasn't a thing that she didn't take care of on the farm, and we were four children, and we really had to work. We'd lay on our knees for two weeks in the strawberry patch and pick strawberries, and we had big gardens, and we just made use of everything. She never throwed away a thing. And it's instilled in Arnold and I to never throw away a thing. You can use it for something. And you were four children. We were four children. And she came from a family of... And she died at the age of 45, too, from pernicious anemia. I see. So I was only 11 years old, too, when my mother died. So you had to help out in the... So then we had some hard years after that. But your mother, she came from a family of 12? No, my dad did. Your dad. Do you know where they came from in Sweden? No, I've got the history, but they came from different parts. I'll let you look at the book. And do you have any connection now with Sweden? No. No. My aunt went over there three years before she passed away two years ago. Went over there three summers and gathered all the Luvdahl history. So we have a book about that big. So there was an easy name to trace that in Sweden, Luvdahl. Yes. But their name was Luvdahl in Sweden, were they? Yes, it was. It was? Luvdahl, I think. L-O-V-D-A-H-L, I think it was. Oh, yeah. And then they changed it. Two omelettes, you know. Yeah. And you don't remember any letters from Sweden in your family? No, I don't. That your dad received any letters? You remember some people from Sweden, don't you, from your dad's side? How many have visited over here? I know Priscilla Johnson went over there, was it three years ago, to learn the Swedish language. She was over there nine months. And I'm sure she must have contacted many of the Luvdahl family. But we haven't seen her now to talk to her about it, so I don't know. But you never remember your parents reading any letters from Sweden and talking about people there? Oh, yes. They got cards from Sweden. They did? When you were growing up? But you don't remember your grandparents? We never had any communication with Sweden. My dad was a Smålanding and my mother was Västergötland. I don't know. Is that a province? Yes, yes. It's a province. But Priscilla studied Swedish in Stockholm, I think. How about customs now at the Christmas time? How did you prepare for the Christmas tree when it was taken in? Where did you pick it and how did you dress the tree? Down there? No, in Kansas. Oh, yeah. Well, we had candles on the tree. I kept them burning up, do you remember? You remember that, too, though. It's the candles on trees, you know. Did you have any ornaments in it? Oh, sure, yeah. Oh, we did that, yeah. We celebrated Christmas all right. Did you have the real Christmas tree then? Oh, yeah. A fir tree or a spruce? Do you remember the sure deal? Oh, I don't know. It was a cedar of some kind. And it was brought in shortly before Christmas, I think. Oh, yeah. Then we always had a Christmas cantata or an Easter cantata, either one. And we carry on the tradition of making Osterkalkats at Christmas time. So you brought the Osterkalkats up here, then? Yes. I make it every year. I made it. I was cook for eight and a half years at Fairhaven Home, where I was. I was a head cook. Well, when they built on the nursing center, I was head cook over there. And then when the head cook over both kitchens left, then I went over there and took over that. But... And it was cooking inherited from your mother? Yes. She taught us. I baked bread when I was nine. But you were only 11 when she died. You had already left? No. We had to bake. You don't know how we had to work. I learned to bake bread before she died. And we worked right along with her, taking care of all the vegetables and fruits. We were just brought up with it. My mother died when she was 45. She learned me how to bake bread, too. So I baked bread like nobody's business. Because we was eight miles from town, Model T Ford, dirt road. If you didn't know how to cook, you'd start at S. So I baked bread, and I did all the cooking. What kind did you use? Rye bread? No, it was white bread. I make rye bread always. I even make it for my grandchildren. Was there used in your family quite a bit of rye bread at that time? Oh, we made all our own bread. Swedish rye bread. And whole wheat bread and white bread. So there's a tradition. What about your daughter-in-law? She's a good cook, but they don't bake like we do. I make a lot of pies and everything, but she doesn't. It's just like with everything else. They're too busy. Well, they know more than we did. And then she's more interested in music. She's had a pretty heavy load with music. And then with their children, you don't have the time. And then the idea of this you can't have salt, you can't have butter, you can't have sugar. That probably throws out a lot of the old cooking, too. That's right. They've got a good excuse there. Yeah, no salt. We as kids, we used to put away meat for the winter, and we used to pack it in salt. And now you can't use salt. I don't know what the score is now. Do you remember if you had the ham in the oat bin? No, we had it in the smokehouse. We cured it and then smoked it. You never saved it in the oat bin? No. In some areas they didn't. Is that right? Oh, yeah, I've heard of it. No, we never tried that. They store it in there. I suppose, to keep it. I have heard of it. I've heard of that. You speak of it. You never practiced that on there? No, we didn't ever do that, no. But I remember the cave that we had our cellar. You know, we had everything down there. It was separate from the house. It was separate from the house. We would churn butter and put that down there, and all our fruit and potatoes and everything. Whatever we raised, that's what we lived on. And then my mother did a lot of baking, and we never bought anything, hardly. I remember her going to town with a 30-dozen case of eggs, and we thought it was the biggest treat if we'd get some oranges and bananas. That was really a treat. Now nothing is a treat because you can buy it out of season as well as in season. So strawberries or anything like that, that isn't a treat. When you were growing up now in Kansas, you saw the difference between the two year groups. Your parents were older, and their peers, you know, as a young girl. And you wanted some changes in the church, or did you want to keep the old tradition like your parents? How did it come about? Because there are always changes every year. One thing we did, we respected everything our parents said and did. We never questioned anything, really. But I remember when they changed the Swedish to English, it was really an argument because the older people didn't want a change at all. We wanted like one Swedish sermon on Sunday, but the older people didn't want a change. But you have to when you have... What was your thought? Do you remember what you thought? Oh, well, we were so young then that I don't know if we really thought too much. We just went along with it the way our parents decided. But the old-timers, they didn't want to change, of course. They didn't want a change. They didn't feel at home then when the Swedish was spoken. When English was spoken, you know, they didn't feel at home because they didn't... Why, in my parental home, we heard nothing but Swedish. My parents conversed in nothing but Swedish. We didn't know a word of English. When we started grade school, we had that to learn on top of everything else. The English language. So the sermon didn't sound so good to them then in English? Oh, no, of course not. They didn't feel at home then? They had to learn to understand a lot of words. How about the gestures? Well, of course, he went to school to learn it, you know. He learned the English language in seminary. You know, they had to learn all those languages. They learned the English. He could have preached all the time in English, but he was brought up on Swedish just like we were. It was easier to... we should say it was easier to speak in Swedish than English. You were confirmed in the English door? Oh, yes. We had Reverend Erikson. I was confirmed when I was 12 years old, and I was so little. I remember one of the deacons in the church wasn't going to let me get confirmed. Why so young? Don't they usually wait that long? No, the others were about that age, but they were bigger. He thought, well, you better wait another year, but my dad said no. I knew more of the Bible verses and all than some of the others did. Well, your sister came, too. And my sister was seven, too. And my dad thought, well, when she goes, we had seven miles to go. And my dad thought, well, when she's going, I could just as well go along, too. And I learned just as well as the rest of them. But it's just that they thought I was a little bit too young, but I don't think I was, because everything I learned in confirmation in the catechism and that I remember so plain. Yet I remember all that. So in your home, then, the table prayers were in Swedish? Uh-huh. Did you say it in English at any time? Oh, yes. Reverend Erikson, he preached mostly in English, didn't he? It was the older ministers like Arnold's grandpa and who were some of the old, Reverend Aitk and some of the older ministers before my time even that they were more at home with them. But I remember it was quite an argument when they were going to change from Swedish to English. So then there were hot discussions. How about your other sister? You have four kids now in your family. Yes, my other sister, she's married to a farmer. They live out next door. And my other sister married a minister, Reverend Raynald Johnson, covenant minister. They're retired, and they just moved into Good Samaritan Village in Kissimmee, Florida. It's a retirement home for ministers and missionaries. And my brother was killed in a car train accident when he was 47, coming to our reunion in Kansas. We had just been in Rock for two years, and we went home for the reunion, and he was just 60 miles from Axtell, and we think he went to sleep, and he never knew what hit him. Him and his 13-year-old boy were both killed. They had a train. A train car. A train ran into them and carried them on there, oh, better than a thousand feet before they even realized that the car was there. So he lived 20 minutes, but after they took him out of the car and they took him to the hospital, but they wouldn't let us see him because he was so badly mangled. But that's the sorrows of life, I guess. When you see the comparison now with the old people having trouble to keep the Swedish in Axtell, Kansas, and you being a little bit older now, do you have anything to say about the church doctrine, for instance, if you want to keep the old timers, are they renewing it faster than you would like to? Oh, I don't think that we could ever have it like that. But I think they could sing this hymns in Swedish and that once in a while. I think it'd be good. But I tell you, there's no people that is as genuine as the older Swedes. I tell you, when they said something, it was the way it should be, and they lived like that too. They didn't compromise and go to this and that that was questionable. So the young people have more input today than the... Well, I think that they got more coming at them. I feel sorry for the kids in high school, everything they've got.