 Kassett två, sida nr ett, fortsättning med Gunnar Jonsson Kassett två, sida ett Så du kom in på polisdepartementet i den värsta perioden? Det var dåligt då med, men du vet det, när var två? 32 En 33 tror jag Det var still dåligt det var Då hade vi inga pengar, du ser, så det var tunga Vi fick arbeta Vi fick arbeta Vi fick ta en vecka av varje månad Utan P Annars hade vi lagt av Tunga lägenheter, men vi lät oss arbeta bara tre veckor i månaden Och så fick vi vara hemma en vecka, men vi fick inte betalt för den veckan Du ser vad jag menar? Den sommaren då, 1933 tror jag det var, sen blev det bättre igen så vi fick betalt för sina arbeten Ni hade ingen fackförening eller union? En association de kallade, polisassociationen, de sa att det inte kunde sträcka eller något sådant Jag vet inte hur det är nu för tiden det ser ut som det är På den tiden var det så mycket pengar som fanns, hur många poliser var ni nu? Det var 74 För jag hade nummer 74 Det var numrade bärsorna, du vet Det gick efter det, nummeret var 74 Och numret 1 det var Bargren Det var Bargren ja Han var fortfarande Bargren Men han började väl att bli på sista valset som man säger? Jag arbetade tror jag fem år för Bargren Sen så kom Månsen in, eller Mänsen kallade jag honom, men han var bara ett par år sen dog han Och sen blev det då Folke Bengtsson Han var en stor kraftig brottare? Ja han var Han var göteborgare eller? Jag vet inte men hans far var liten, jag kände hans far han var inte stor och kraftig Men Folke var kraftig så jag gällde det Så Bargren, det är många historier om honom Vad gjorde han egentligen? Hade han respekt med sig när han var ute på stan? Han, som jag säger jag var ju Ny då du vet, jag kommer ihåg när Bargren sa, jag var inne där du vet när jag skulle börja, det var jag inför Bargren och då gav han mammin Han talade lite om att He says, when you get out there, he says Enforce the law he says And Don't look for trouble he says because trouble comes to you he says You don't have to look for it But take care of it if there is anything coming up but don't go around and look for trouble he says And here har du en gun och en badge och sådana och nu gå ut där så han Go out there he says And take care of yourself and do The best you can He told me And that was true Inte tittade jag för något trubbel, vi var ju peace officers du vet Men du vet det var plentig trubbel som du kom in till i alla fall, det var ju alltid trubbel Och på den tiden var det mycket fullhundar och det var ju rabbers också Jag har ju En natt En kväll var det, jag skulle gå hem klockan elva Jag var på 7 stedsrytt men jag var förststrykt där på hörnet, jag var I stadsrytten då Det började ringa, det var klockan 9 And I went back there and they had a grill there, there was a steel grill you know And a padlock and the padlock was broken And the alarm ringing and I stood there you know and And I drew my gun out because I figured there must be someone in the building but I didn't go in there but I stood outside And pretty soon up come a guy here you know, out of the basement behind that grill see And And I says to him stay right there I says don't move I told him And I says if you do I'm gonna blow the guts out of you because I would have shot him I figured I was dog and mad at those dog and burglars, they had been burglarizing all around there before a little bit And pretty soon så kom det en motorcyklist Han hörde på motorcykel han hette Dahl, Dick Dahl Han kom på motorcykel Och svängde in där i älgen Så då fick jag ju hjälp se Så en liten stund efter det så kom det ett par detektiv som åkade in där och det hörde Det ringer du vet, det där burglarmar ringer sig Och jag stod där du vet med gunnen på den där gubben han var innanför grillen han fick inte komma ut och vänd sig men då så skulle vi släppa ut gubben Du vet för det var väl nog folk där så han hade inga vapen som vi kunde se Men Han kom ut och vet Och de tog hon till Polisstation Och där hade han puttat upp en väldig fight med detektiverna Han var en ex-kandvikt Han var från Denver, Colorado Har han varit Så det var en riktig criminal och han hade tools nere i källaren där han hade bringit ner Och he told me I said you broke in here I said no I didn't break in he says I was Walking down the alley here he says and a couple of guys came and took me he says and pushed me down here he says That's what he told me see Du tror inte på sådana där stories du vet se Så jag sa just det där because I would have shot that guy in the belly I would have shot him in the stomach Det blev en write up in the paper där jag hade mitt namn och mitt picture Jag skulle ha sävat det men det gjorde jag inte Om den där hade vi ett Jag vill inte ha några crim, vill du ha några crim? Men om du jämför nu Du kom in i 1932, det var en väldigt svår tid, det var ju folk utan arbete Det skulle bli väldigt mycket stölder och sånt, om du jämför med idag nu, det är mycket mycket mer stölder efter sig än idag Vad berodde det på? Folk på den tiden var Tacksamma för lite, nu expected it so god damn much you know They figured that's still if we don't have it see Så det mesta arbetet du hade då var det poliskorv på den tiden, det var 400? 400 för det mesta ja Och så lite slagsmål då? Ja lite slagsmål då Men i länderna och svenskan slogs de sina fruktansvärt så jag sa det Det var för i världen, det var fler än min tid ja, nej nej nej det brukade slås på bryggan där Det sa svenskarna, ja men ja, ja men Men det förekommer inte på din tid? Nej nej, jag arbetade med erländer, vi hade erländer på polisdepartementen Och jag arbetade med, de var good guys, they were alright, they were along fine sweens and irish dem days Hur var det på danser och så då, kom de överens med svenskarna när de kom in på din tid och dansade med svenska flickor? Det var det lite trubbel ibland, ja men jag styr ungefär sånt där Det var privata vakterar? Ja Karl Eklund var vakt ofta ibland på dig? Karl Eklund, han träffade vi på båten, han var på båten när vi kom över på Stockholm på samma gång Karl Eklund, yes, och hans syster Rut Och han var deputy sheriff? Ja han var deputy sheriff, ja Hur klarade han sig då för han hade väl inte rätt på båten då? Han var ju för kort, jag kan inte begripa Det kunde inte han nå, men han kom in på sheriffen Och vi hade en doing, så jag var belånning i Vasa, du vet och då var jag i Programkommittén, du vet i Vasa så jag hade charge av, så vi hade Karl Eklund han var ute där, vi hade en picknick ute där och han var sheriff där du vet och jag skulle avlöna honom du vet så jag fick, hade charge av det du vet pengarna där så jag skulle av så här, betalade Karl Eklund 25 dollar minns jag han skulle få För han hade gått där ute och strövat runt lite i parken du vet Ja, då var jag på polisdepartement, that's right Men han hade ingenting med City? Inget med City, bara Winnebago, yeah that's right Och de betalade honom där ute för bara för han skulle hålla mun sig De hade lite business begämling med han du vet och det skulle inte han titta på du vet han skulle Look away sig, därför de hade sheriff du vet där Det var också en annan period du kom in till det var Prohibition Ja, Prohibition, det var Prohibition, när jag startade då var det Prohibition Så det redan, 32, slutade Prohibition 33 då Roswald gav in då Då blev det öppet för sälja tevern sådär du vet så. Vad hände då, var det mycket sådana här Spiklandning som man säger före nu och började? Vi var, ja jag har varit med när vi var och Reda du vet en del botläggar sådär men Ja så jag har lånat upp hela Vagnen full med botläggar så grejer Har du släckat med dig slutsänden? Nej det gjorde inte jag åtminstone, ja. Men vargryfen fick du rycka ut? Vargryfen fick jag rycka ut med slägga ibland. Vargryn var det du skulle säga? Vargryn han, he was a good guy He was a diplomat de kallade Han kunde du vet bli tuff och han kunde äkta just like you, he could be, most of the time he was a good guy you know he was with these guys and then they took care of Vargryn du vet, I always got a little, I can't prove it but I know Men det var väl på det, det var inte gott att vara Chief no, du var tvungen att kunna skjuta dig. Ja that's right Där kunde han med sig så det var nog lite tuffare för Bengtsson han kom in då han var inte den vägen han var Han, de sa han körde ut en del gubbar i Afton och de kom och kom plena sa de, jag vet inte jag har inte Och det är väl alltid på det viset att de försöker få ett introm så att säga Men Vargryn han tyckte att det var problemet och han hade ju Han gick ju med Olssons tur Hur är det med den historien? Jag har ingen bevis på jag har bara hört det, jag har hört allt det där Det var aldrig i tidningarna då? Ja jag har hört allt det där du vet sig. Men han fick en haversvämja? Ja visst det fick han sådär Yes Du såg inte att han var halvdagen på veckor efteråt? Nej jag såg inte det Det är konstigt att den historien har gått ner. Men han var ju gammal man. Ja men det är så Hur gammal var han när han pensionerade sig? För han blev polischef 1894 eller vad det var. Ja han var runt 85 år kan hända 80-85 år som klart, jag var med på hans avskedsparty du vet det var jag. Han var så gammal? Well han var 80 år jag tänker. Var han gift? Han var gift, han hade sitt ansvar då för det var, men han hade en dotter du vet hon gifte det där Williamson du vet. Vad hette dottern nu igen? En bland flicka, fin flicka. Det var hans dotter. Hon gifte den som hette Williamson som hade Allstations, det var inte Allstations det var flera Allstations. Han var en rik gubbe Han hade en rakenhjul upp där, den där Williamson ägde. Han var in the money. Det var hans dotter så han hade väl varit Han hade varit gift men vi har aldrig sett hans fru när jag kom på det här på polisdepartement. Då var han alltid ensam och han hade chaufför du vet han körde inte bil själv. Han hade limousin. En stor kärlek hade han och det var en gubbe som körde som hette Taylor som körde för honom när han skulle ut. Så han kopplade kontoret och gav limousin varje gång? Yes, yes, yes. Jag var ju inne i, då var jag inte inne i barnen, efteråt senare. Men där skulle han in och parka där i barnen, det kallades polisbarn. Ni hade ingen rydande polis i dag? No, no, no. Det var bara några bilar när jag började. Det var en fotgångare och motcyklar. Jag ville åka motcykel men jag var ju gift och hade två barn och jag tänkte I'm not gonna risk my life if I can help it. They called me and wanted me to ride a motorcycle och jag sa till dem att if I can get away from it I'd rather not take that job. Because it was a heck of a job, you chase speeders and stuff like that. If you drive in the mud and stuff like that you don't get much speed. So I got away from it that time. But then they came out with three-wheelers, you know, they would mark the cars and stuff. Mark the tires and stuff. Then the same guy called me in, the secretary, his name was Reinhardt. He called me in and said, I heard SS that you know how to ride a motorcycle because you know when I was single, I remember we had a motorcycle here when we first came in. He found out that I could ride a motorcycle. You have to take that motorcycle, that there three-wheeler he says. That'd be only one month out of three he says because they work days. You ride a motorcycle and the rest of it you walk. It doesn't matter two months but that third month. For ten years I was riding that doggone three-wheeler, you know, marking tires and chasing whatever you could. What kind of sidecar did you have? No, it was a three-wheeler. They had two sidecars, a Chevrolet and a Busch. There were two sidecars but I don't know what they had, they didn't do much. They couldn't arrest anyone? Oh yes, they could if they could keep it in the sidecar but it wasn't good to have. If you got a wildcat or something. How about Lindström? He was much older than you were. I worked with Lindström when I started. He was a police officer in Sweden. He lived in Gartenburg. He was a policeman in Gartenburg. He was big and strong and a boss. Somehow he got in the police department. I've heard many stories about him. But when I worked with him, he liked everything. He wanted a big soup. We worked on the dog side and he wanted to show me what to do. He said it was so hot and if someone came by, he would have to stand there. It was in the afternoon and it was so hot. He said we should go up here and cool down. There were no taverns. We went up there and went into the room. He ordered a whiskey. He took a glass of milk and drank it. I only took a little bit. It was on the way to the temple. He wanted a soup. I asked him if he could drink it. He said he didn't like a teaser. He was so fat. He was so fat that he couldn't stand there. In the evening he ran out and yelled, Turn on your light! He was well known in Rappford. He was retired at the same time as Bargrin. Who was the base for the police in Rappford? Mayor and City Council. Bargrin was all mixed up. She was nice. I don't know if she got a phone call or not. If we come to the mayor, Halström. He was mayor when I came in. He was mayor in 1921. I think he was mayor when I came in. How was he as a chief in Rappford? He was a socialist. I didn't have any problem with him. I don't remember anything we had to do with him. The authorities had captains and such, but he never called the police. You were never in the working club in Rappford? No. Carl Ekström. Ågren was the one with the long hair. He was the one who was going to be mayor in 1912. He was a socialist. I saw in the newspaper today that Charlie Brown was mayor for a while. He had died now. I felt him. There is nothing I say about him. There are some stories that are true. I can't say anything else than that. There are some people who are in the police force. The police guard what they do. But like Hallström now. He was quite many years, so he must have been very popular in Rappford. I don't know. He wasn't a good speaker either. He was quiet. He was more determined. He was a good friend. Blom was popular because he was frugal. There were many Swedes in Rappford. He was a good friend. He went down to the garage and cleaned the windows. It's possible. No, no, no. After Blom had finished, he went down to Florida. We came down to Florida and met a family there. His name was Magnuson. He talked to Blom. He told a story. He was at a convention once. He was a major. He was frugal. He didn't spend more than he was forced to. He came back to Rappford. He was a good friend. He told a story. He was frugal. He was a good friend. He was a good friend. He liked Blom because he was frugal. He was the way himself. They were elected because of that. Blom was a good friend. He was beaten. Lundström was in Rappford. They had so much money. You were a police officer in Rappford. You had to take off one extra day. There have been about 7500 police officers in Rappford over the years. You were 74. Now you have about 250 or 60 police officers. The city has grown. There weren't many in Rappford in 1932. There were no shopping centers. It was a group of police officers. It was a group of police officers. It was a group of police officers. I have been in Skadkar for many years. Oskar Kraft and I used to work together in Skadkar. I also went with a guy called John Currie. I had all kinds of people. We were a line-up of two. We drove around all night. One time, I and Casey Peterson came. We drove to Skadkar. We drove to Skadkar. There was a window out there. I told Bob to stay here. I went around the front door and looked in the window. I saw someone in the front door. I went out and saw Casey Peterson. He had a gun drawn and a gun in his hand. He had broken in. We had a radio on the car so we could call the police station. A police officer came out and took in a guy. His name was Leif Heit. He was a young boy, only 22 years old. We caught him and we caught several. I can't remember so well. I went to school there. We had a radio operator's license during the war. We couldn't talk on the air otherwise. We had a radio in the cars. During the war, it was a fight. We had a lot of trouble with whores. We had a lot of trouble with whores. We had a lot of trouble with whores. We came down to the west side. We came down to the west side. It was 1 o'clock at night. We saw a whore on the bench and a soldier on top of her. They didn't even climb off when we put the flashlight on them. I guess he finished or something. What did you do in that case? She was obliged to go out. He was supposed to check out Iraq and go to another camp in Wisconsin. I understood that they let him go but they find her. So you also patrolled Cambrend. We didn't go to Cambrend. The soldiers came into the city. But the rest of the population was calmer during the war. They couldn't drive cars so much because there was no petrol. So Lindström didn't have many... You don't know if it's true or not. And then you went to Raxford after the war. You had these factories that were built during the war. Did you get a lot of new workers? Yes, a lot of volunteers. It was after the war. It was so that he judged... I was on the 7th street and he was so full he went to hang around. He came down from Tennessee. He said that there was no one down there if you went to hang around. But he was nice enough so he went home. But he said that where he came from you could go to Slodank. But you couldn't go to Raxford. A full person couldn't go on the streets. Then you would have to drive a car home. If he took care of you, it went well. They could get by with more than they had at Spås. Hillbillies. How long did you work as a police officer in Raxford? 26 years. I could have stayed longer but I retired. I was a police officer. Sometimes my wife came down with some food. She said that it smelled like gas. The cars were filled with gas. I was afraid of the drunkards who worked for me. I had a job. I had been in that business for 8 years. I thought that I should quit before I got too gas. Then I met the judge. The judge. His name was Kullberg. He had a charge of juvenile detention home. He took in the kids who broke bicycles and cars. They had a detention home. You needed a man to guard them. I went down to Kullberg. I knew him before he became a judge. I played golf with his son yesterday. He is still alive. He is retired. I said that I was looking for a job. He said that I was just the man he was looking for. I decided that I had to resign first. He said that he would let me know when he was ready. I went up to the police chief. They were boasted. He said that he didn't blame me. He knew that Kullberg and him had talked. I had to fill out a resignation paper. I started down there and worked there for 8 years. I am retired now. It was nerve-racking. There were 14-15 year olds and 12 year olds. I was CT. It was nerve-racking. I had to lock them in a room. I locked him in a room. I went over there. I went over to him and said that I can't remember his name. He didn't know I was a policeman. They hated policemen. I was just a civilian. I said that if you behave like a man, you don't have to swear. You can't swear around here. We had a ping pong table and a phonograph. They could play and read. I said that I had to behave. I said that if he promised me that, I would let him out. He was a good kid. He listened to me. I wouldn't tolerate that. My parents came down. He was there for a while. No more coffee, please, please, please. Some of them were released. After a while I had stolen a bicycle. It was nerve-racking. I thought I couldn't stay. Then my wife died. I stayed on about four months after she died and then I quit. It was a difficult time. Many Swedish families had many children. It was strange that they had small circumstances. Now there are not so many big families anymore. They seem to have kept together better than two or three children. They care for each other. You compare it to the law crime. On the west side, there are very few Swedes. Was there more crime on the east side? It was a rough street. There were a lot of drunks and Irish and Polish. On the east side, there was a small street called Sävers. It was a problem. There were a lot of blacks and blacks. It was a bad area. When you came to the 7th street on the east side, you knew a lot of people. I did too. They never knew who I was. I didn't have much trouble with them. They reminded me good there. I left that to the detectives. It was a detective job. It was a detective job. It was a job that disappeared. Were there many filleries after the prohibition was lifted? I don't know. It was a bad place. When the police opened the door, they were patrolling. We went through the house and looked. It was open. So it was a mistake that they closed again in 1917? It lasted for a while. The priests did not want to have filleries. I remember a woman who came to me. I have seen them here. A lady came to me once and said that my old man was in there. It was a competition. She said she could not do anything. I could not go and do anything. The only thing you can do is to go to the state authority and get them to blacklist him. It was a shame about the driving. She said she was in a soup and she had no money for food. You came during the 1920s and you had the opportunity to see your father drink too much. Most of the farmers who came to Sweden were not allowed to drink. I drove. It disappeared in the late 1920s. Not many came to America. After 1939 it was forbidden. During the 1920s and 1930s there were people who came from Sweden who had great talents. Guda mekanics. Hillman, Svensson and others. That was what put Rackford on its feet. There were 4,000 employees. When I came to Rackford, there were so many furniture factories. It has just died out. They complained that it cost so much to transport lumber. They moved to the south. There are still furniture factories in the south. There is nothing to buy up here. In the furniture industry now, there were many who were in charge of oldtimers. We can take Bernard Magnussen. He was a good worker. You had the idea that there was something that should be better. I have changed jobs several times. I have learned a little bit each time. Lannström and Larsson were good at their jobs. The sons of these men did not want to have it that way. They got more education and went to higher jobs. They became salesmen and businessmen. They could not keep them standing by a bench. You have two sons in your first relationship. He is a school teacher and retired. He went to college and got what they called a diagnosis. Both of them are college graduates. He is making money like ever. He lives in Milwaukee. He was teaching computers and stuff like that. He made pretty good. He has his own home. He is doing well. He left home yesterday morning. I did not want to have them in the factory. I thought they could do better if they came out in something else. One became a school teacher and the other a businessman. He represents a company. He has been doing this for many years. He has sold articles. The police work is a hectic and nervous job. You do not know what will happen in the evening. There are a lot of policemen that are not too good. They were a little unreasonable. When I was in the department, I figured this way. I am not going to arrest anybody for nothing. They have to have a reason. I got by with that. If they were violating, I could arrest them. I did not like that. They abuse the power. Some of them want to drink a little. He does not drink as much as you do. He is a strong man. You were a police officer. I worked with a man named Frank Zemsek. He was a criminal. He was a bohemian. He was only 1.3 years old when his parents came over. His parents could not speak English. He was a good policeman. He did not want to pick on anybody. If they bugged him, he could handle it. I used to play golf with him. He died. I was at the hospital. He said to me, imagine me. He was not that old. He was strong. He was strong and strong. He could not figure it out. He got out of the hospital. He was forbidden to do any heavy work. He had a cottage in Wisconsin. By a lake. It was high up. He had about 20 steps to go down to the water. He had a pier. He took it up. He got a heart attack and died. Did you have any sports club in the police station? No. We used to go down to the gym. We used to go down there and box and skip rope and wrestle. We used to do that on our own time to protect ourselves. We could handle ourselves. I think they have it now. I think they have it now. If I had taken a police exam today, I would not have been approved. First of all, you must have a college degree. You must have a college degree. Everything has to be written down on paper. It was not much of that when I was younger. You can't buy that. If you are not a little diplomatic, you are a loser. How were you politically? We were supposed to be neutral. Who did you vote for? I was a little bit of a Republican. I have always been a little bit of a Republican. But I have been a Democrat sometimes. He told me that he was a Democrat. He said, do not vote for the Republican who ruined the whole country. Republicans were no good. It should be Democrats. He was open to me. I thought so. There are many good men who are Republicans. Many good men who are Democrats. You should vote for the person and not for the party. He said, do not vote for the Republican. He was so stubborn. He swore at priests and Republicans. He said, I will take you home one day. He said, I hope it sticks to a fan. I did not say anything. But that was only because he was a Republican. He was a Democrat. He had a lawyer called Davis. He was on the school board once. He was a little bit of a screwball. He worked with a lawyer called Davis. He liked him. He was a Democrat. He was not for unions. He was a little bit of a screwball. I called him. I did not reason religion with him. I did not reason politics with him. He was so sarcastic.