 of a very impoverished rural farm background and his brother. Yeah. Gotford. Gotford. Gotford. Yeah. E.P. Baker would know him as E.P. Yeah. He was a very interesting man. What year was it? Oh, you got me, Leonard. It would have had to have been between 1905 and 1910. They felt this very strong loyalty to my mother and, you know, and particularly my older sister. Your sisters. Yeah. And I do too, of course, but not to the extent. Maybe they overdid it then. Yeah. Yeah. They did. So you rebelled against it a little bit there. Well, again, it's a matter of being, you know, the only male child in a family. Were you a little bit spoiled, you think, on that? Or were you? Oh, I'm sure I was. I'm sure I was. But by the same token, you know, I think one of my earliest memories is, you know, my mother saying, I don't understand you. And, you know, it's true. She never did. To this day, she doesn't understand me. But. Is that right? Yeah. Yeah. So you had newer ideas than brought it home, of course. Oh, yes. Yes. Again, you know, not to dwell on it too much. My mother was always the. She was the practical person in the family. My father was more of an intellectual. And I tended to inherit a lot of his mindset. My interests were more into the intellectual rather than into the practical parts of life, and so therefore, you know, I think as we all do now, when we see traits in our children that we recognize as coming from ourselves and we're not too proud of ourselves, then you really get upset when you see it showing up in your kids. And so I think. Then you try to correct it and it's too late. Oh, yeah. Yeah. That's right. That's right. So your father, you said, what kind of work was he doing then? Well, my father. They came very young then, first of all. Oh, yes. Yes. Matter of fact, they did. His parents died or? No. No. And it's interesting. It's sad, but it's interesting. I know almost nothing of my father's family. I never knew any of my grandparents. But my dad's family, I know almost nothing of them because they made such a complete break. They, I think their father came to this country before they did. And, but they never heard from him. He more or less just left home. But then my dad and his brother, I think they came together and they, you know, they literally, they bummed around the country for a while. And they got caught up in the socialist movement. They were very, very strong socialists. During the First World War then? Yes. Prior to and during the First World War. You know, and some of my dad's heroes were the old IWW Wobblies. I don't know if you've ever heard. Yes. Yeah. Okay. But they were kind of free thinkers. And, but they wound up in Duluth for a while, you know, doing general labor. But then they both finally wound up in Rockford. And my dad was a very skilled machinist in the machine tool industry. My uncle was a tool and die maker, which was, you know, that was a trade that was much respected. And still is, but not to, you know, in the immigrant community. And my uncle worked at this one manufacturing plant for, you know, 40 some years. And my goodness, that was the highest praise anybody could have. And my dad worked for, well, he worked for this mechanics, universal joint company, he worked for Sunstrand. Then he made a big move. He went to work for a local dairy. And he was a milkman for a number of years, which he just loved. It was, you know, it was out of the shop. And, but financially it just didn't go. And so he then went back to work in industry at Sunstrand Corporation. He went back to work in about 19, or went back to work in the factory, 1939 or 40, just before World War II. And so he worked there then until his death in 1953. So he was essentially a machinist. That was his skill. His ideas, now you said he was intellectual kind of fellow. Yeah. He read quite a bit then? Oh, yes, yeah. He was a good reader. And he enjoyed music. Again, knowing Baker, you know, Baker is good Templar. Baker is a good Templar background. Were they good Templars too, your parents? Yes. My mother particularly. My dad belonged to the good Templar organization. But then for a number of years they didn't belong. But all their friends were from the good Templars. So that was the, that was the environment I grew up in. And very grateful for that environment. Was he here in Rockford when the First World War started? Yeah. They had the Socialist Club, or the Arbiterklub, as they call it in Swedish. Did you hear that? Oh, I'm sure that, yeah. Mm-hmm. Yeah. Do you know if he participated in that one? I don't. I don't know for certain. But I would say there's a 95% chance that my dad and his brother were members of the Socialist Club. They, my dad was one of the, he was never forceful enough to be an organizer. But he was a very devoted member of many things. And he participated in the first strike. He worked at the Sunstrand Corporation at that time. And he was a participant in their first strike. And... Was that during the 20s? That would have been, yeah, probably, if not into the 20s, just before the 20s. He was a foreman. And, but he went out on strike. And I, from what I have heard, this, the strike was pretty ill-fated. It lasted, you know, maybe a week or something. And everybody went back except my dad, who, this, you know, this was... He stayed away. That's right. He was on strike, and by gosh, that's the way it was going to be. And they, the management evidently, you know, talked to my dad and my mother. And, you know, I told my mother, you know, get Ed back to work, for goodness sake. And so he was in Chicago working and all over. But he wouldn't go back. So he lost his job there. And I don't think my mother ever forgave him for that. I really don't. They had a good marriage, and they were very devoted people. But I don't think she really ever forgave him for that, because if he would have stayed there, you know, he would have certainly gone up into management. And, you know, they would have had a much better life economically than they did. So... But he took that risk. Yeah, yeah, that's right. It was a stand. It was hard to explain that to your wife, I suppose. Oh, certainly. The feeling he had. Oh, certainly, yes. This moral commitment, you know. And the management talking to your mother about it. Sure. Because, again, looking at it from an economic standpoint, this group of immigrants from this general period, you know, whether they were Swedish, Lithuanian, wherever they came from, they were a group of people that weren't treated too fairly in this country. You know, they came... They took advantage of them. You bet they took advantage of them, or were taken advantage of. They were taken advantage by everybody. And that suspicion still is ingrained in the few surviving members of that community. But they struggled for every cent they made. And my mother's goals were always simple goals. A home, a home of our own that nobody can throw us out of, you know. And they did start, they did buy a home, and they lost it in the Great Depression. And my dad was never an adventuresome man. He was very, very conservative. And he didn't want to commit himself for, you know, any large debts. And my mother, you know, nuts to that noise, you know, let's try anything. So naturally, when a man has a job, a good job, and is in danger of losing it because of a moral commitment that he's made to the wife, that doesn't mean anything, you know. They're going to fire you. Go back. You know, nuts to morality. And, you know, 99% of the people did, but not Pi. So the management, they had the worker over the baron, so to speak. Oh, sure they did. Because they were, as soon as they had a family, they could pay them almost anything because they knew if they had a back. Certainly. And again, I don't say it with any bitterness. You know, whether we like it or not, this has always been and is part of the American economic system, is utilization of whatever resources are available. And if they had Ed Johnson working out in the shop there, and if he didn't want to work, there were seven, eight other Ed Johnsons that would be glad to come in there and do it for less money. You know, so. So what you would think, though, especially during the Depression, you would think there would be thousands of socialists in Iraq at that time. Yes. There were stamped black sheep in the community. Well, kind of. It would have been so interesting to live, to be a part of that, to see or feel what that feeling was. But you're right. I've often wondered that, too. There were a lot of socialists in Iraq. You have Harry Anders. He was one. Yeah. You had David Killeen. Yeah, sure. Yeah, that's right, Dave. But they didn't get any followers. No, no, no, they didn't. And I don't know. Herman Halston was another one. He was a very strong socialist. Oh, sure. He turned. This is the funny part of it. With Rockford, too, it's a unique community. It still is. It's not anything like it used to be where you had the division of the Scandinavians and the Italians. It's nothing like that anymore. But the Scandinavians were almost two distinct classes in some way. There was the drinking Swedes and the good-tempered Swedes, and then there was the church-going Swedes and the non-church-going Swedes. The Swedes that came here and really made it real well, they became so conservative. And the other Swedes that didn't make it as well, a lot of those became very liberal. But there was this whole middle strata of Swedes that were doing pretty good. They were living pretty good. And I don't mean this in any way to sound like a condemnation of the people, but a lot of these people were strong church members. And this rebellion, again, against the state church. They belonged to the free church, the covenant churches. And they became pretty smug and self-satisfied people, and they were Republicans. And in a conservative community like this was, it was okay if you were a Democrat or a Socialist or a Liberal, but you didn't really want to go around yelling about it because people were going to jump on you. And so I think there were a lot of people that were Socialists at heart, but didn't really want to make that big commitment to it. And many times it seems to me that the management, they had two good factors in their favor, the wives and the husbands and the pastors. Yes, very much so. But wouldn't you think that the pastor of a church would like the workers to get more paid because then you get more on the collection plate? They never thought that. I don't know. Again, it would be unfair to generalize. But did the pastor pay off for the workers at church? I don't know. Here again, you know. Because if you give workers more pay, you will have a better community. I mean, everybody pulls in to buy more. Oh, sure, sure. But at that time, that was not the question. No. Again, it's hard to, the conjecture is hard. But I think then Lutheran pastors particularly were much, well, they would have nothing to do with politics or the financial lives of their parishioners. We belong to a Lutheran church. And it has been so interesting to me. I was confirmed in a Lutheran church. Did Isaiah know first? No, I was at Taber. Yes, and we now belong to this Alpine Lutheran over here. But the pastor that I took the confirmation lessons from, he was one of the old, you know, the last generation. No gray areas, right is right, wrong is wrong. You screw up, you're going to go to hell, and there's no question about it. The pastors now are much more socially active. The pastor of the church we belong to now, he's one of my best friends, and he is a man that I just delight being with because he has an intellect that's this big, you know, and he sees beyond small barriers. But, you know, it would have been unheard of for a pastor in those days to get in a pulpit and say, for example, that the employers are exploiting you people in my parish. They would never say that. No, no, they had no business being in that area. So they were distracted, they just didn't say it? I doubt whether they took any sides at all. If they did, it was probably you'd better go back to work and take care of your family. That's, you know, probably. But I don't think the clergy was not the social force then that it is now. It was a religious force, and that's all it was. It's an interesting point. I'd never thought of that. Herman Halston, he was very radical when he was young. Evidently, yeah. And marching with people, and they imprisoned some of them, I believe. Yes, yes. He skipped when they were starting to burn a bit, I understand he skipped the field. Oh, really? But he was elected on a socialist ticket. Yes, he was. There must have been a lot of Swedes and even non-Swedes electing him. Yeah, oh yeah. And you would think the socialist would be a bad name at that time, but apparently... No, no. It went in there. No, evidently not. Somebody said that once, or I read it, it said that Rockford and Winnebago County is such a strange community because it's a very politically, very conservative community. They elect Republican representatives, generally very conservative Republican representatives. They always seem to vote for Republican presidential candidates, but they elect Democratic and Socialistic mayors. That's the strange thing. Well, Herman Halston, and I think C. Henry Bloom, if he didn't run as a Socialist was... He was close to it. Yeah, right. It is. It's strange. I don't know what the reasoning is. And you don't remember David Carleen at that time? Yes, I know Dave Carleen, the barber. Yeah, do you remember him being active in... I remember him from Good Templars. He was a very active member of the Good Templars, and as I say, my parents belonged to the Good Templars, and then when I was a kid, the group of guys that I hung around with, we were all Good Templars still. Incidentally, I talked to my mother last night. I mentioned I was going to get together with you. She is 98 or 90? She's 93, and she would be very interested to talk to you. Maybe the next time you come up, call me ahead of time, and I'll set it up. She's, as I said, she's blind, and things aren't going real well for her. I'm afraid she isn't going to be with us all that much longer. But things are just kind of falling apart for her, and life gets kind of... But then maybe she'll enjoy talking to you about those times. Oh, she would. She would just love to. Coming up in terms, you've got a lot of memories. Yes, she does, and really, too, her memory is not one of the things that has failed her. She has a remarkably clear, sharp mind. Did she participate in any of those socialist doings? No, no. She stayed away from it? Yeah, very much so. She was a very nonpolitical person. They had a Sunday school during the early 20s, while the probably late teens, and your sister didn't go to that one, the Sunday school? Well... Dawn at the SMS Hall? Oh, no, no, uh-uh, no. They went to church, the regular church? No, we didn't. Everything was a contradiction. Among other things, my dad, I wouldn't describe him as an atheist. He was more of an agnostic. He, I'm sure, believed in a supreme being somewhere, but he had severe problems with organized religion, which was not unusual. And my mother would have liked to have a church affiliation, but my dad didn't want one. So, consequently, my closest sister and I at that time, we did go to Sunday school, but we weren't members of the church, and we were both confirmed. My sister developed a very strong relationship with Tabor Church. All her friends were from church. And so she maintained a very strong tie to that church until her death. She was 40 when she died. And consequently, when I went into the service in World War II, I don't think I went back. After that, I didn't go back to a church for much of any reason until, well, about 20 years ago, right after my sister had died, and my family and I moved into this house. Then we felt a need to go back to a church, and we did. As a matter of fact, my wife, at the time we were married, she was Catholic, which, you know, 33 years ago. That was still a pretty tough thing to get through. I mean, there was an awful lot of real foolishness involved with them. Can you explain the reason why you... Oh, yeah. Oh, God. My mother still, you know, she... For the past 20 years, my wife has been a Lutheran, you know, like... She was the one that said, we're going back to a church, and I said, okay, fine. And she said, we'll go over here, and I said, okay. But, oh, geez, that took an awful long time for my mother to accept. But there was probably a sitting in every immigrant that came from Europe. Oh, you bet. Oh, sure. And it was... my wife's family, her dad was an immigrant from Lithuania, and her mother came from a Lithuanian background. And I'm sure that my wife marrying me created as much of a stir in her family as it did in ours. How did you meet then? Well, I worked... It was after the service that you came over? Yes, yes. I got out of the service in 1947, actually. And then I spent a couple of years in Chicago. I worked in Chicago for a couple of years. And oddly enough, so did my wife. We didn't know each other. We both went to the same high school in the same class. We didn't know each other in high school, but then we met afterwards. And I worked in a bank on Broadway, Broadway and 7th Street, and she worked for a doctor that was across the street. So that's how we met. But one of the few good decisions I've ever made in my life. But it's hard to explain for the earlier generation. Yeah, it was. It was. And, you know, again, there's like so many things that are so important at the moment, and then as time goes on, you find out it doesn't make a bit of difference. But it was... As I said, my mother particularly was... She thought that was a very bad move on my part. I'm sure she saw me being wound up, chained in a Catholic church somewhere. So what happened then? You became Lutherans, both of you? Yeah, yeah. She... yeah. But there's still some controversy in her family, though, on that side. No, it really didn't, because she had joined the Catholic church strictly on her own. Her parents were not church-going people either. And before we met, she had felt the need and the desire for a church affiliation, so she all on her own had selected the Catholic church and gone to it. And now it's like so many things have changed now. In many ways, some of the Lutheran churches are much more conservative than Catholic churches are. It seems to be shifting now. Sure, sure. We did some remodeling over at our church a couple of years ago, and I was on the committee that was in charge of that. The man that did the remodeling jokingly said, he said, this is a great business. He said, we're keeping busy taking all the statues out of the Catholic churches and selling them to the Lutheran churches. There might be some truth in that. Oh, sure. It's funny. It's a great life. Oh, sure. It's so interesting, because as I say, we all do it, and I'm as guilty of it as anyone. You get very concerned about something that's going on in the moment, and in the long run, it doesn't make much difference, and it isn't going to change too many things. But when you're growing up, you have no chance to defend yourself, because you've got to listen to what the older generation tells you. Yes, yes, that's right. If they are wrong, of course, you will notice it after a while when you get older. Yes, yes. That's again with the good Templar philosophy. How was your effect on your dad's friends? They were good Templars, and the Arbital Club, as they called it. Do you remember that word, Arbital Club? I don't remember the word, but I, you know, I, well, sure I do. I've seen it and heard of it. What did they discuss then? Well, let's see. Was it Petering out then during the first... See, by the time I came along, yeah, that movement... It was gone. It was pretty well gone, yes. You know, my dad, as I said, some of his heroes were Joe Hill, and he could sing some of the Joe Hill songs from the, what, the Red Songbook, and, but he, the movement had pretty well mellowed out by that. I think the labor unions had absorbed a lot of the fervor of that time, so no, I never really saw that when it was strong. And your parents lost the house, you said, in the early 30s? Yes, it would have been the very early 30s, yes, about 1932, 33. And your dad didn't have any work then? Yes, he did. He worked. He always had a job. That was during the time he was a milkman, a milk wagon driver. But it was not enough then to keep the house payment? No, no. And the bank or the mortgage company didn't... Yeah, it was a mortgage company, and, yeah, you know, it was the sort of thing, even by the standards of that time, there wasn't an awful lot of money involved. They didn't have much of a down payment in it, and, you know, their monthly payments were not that much. So they haven't put too much into it then? No, financially it wasn't a devastating loss, but psychologically it was a real blow, particularly to my mother. They then bought a home after World War II. So they rented then right after the war? Yes, yeah, they rented an apartment, two, three, about three or four different places, and then right after World War II they did buy another home, and that was my mother's dream come true. No, excuse me, not right after the war, it was about 1942, because I lived in that house a number of years before I went into the service. So how about the friends now? Were they helpful to help out when something like that happened? Oh, sure, oh, sure. Again, moral support more than anything, because my parents' circle of friends, nobody was very wealthy. There were a couple of people that were self-employed, and they were considered to be quite well off, but by any standards they weren't that well off, they just happened to be self-employed. So, yes, and there was a very strong feeling of friendship. It's kind of interesting lately to hear the nostalgia for the Depression days, because of the sense of family and all that sort of thing. And it's true, that part of it is true. There was a sense of belonging in that, but it's kind of ironic when people get all starry-eyed about the Depression, because it wasn't any fun. Again, I just observed a little bit of it as a child. I never had the real heartache that my parents did of trying to maintain and support a family during those very difficult economic times. But in retrospect, I don't think I ever felt deprived, because I didn't know there was any other way. There was always food on the table. You know, Scandinavians, my gosh, you eat to celebrate, you eat when you're depressed, you eat when you're feeling half way, you just eat, you don't care where it comes from. Well, you wonder many times how they could get it though. Sure, sure, that's right. You were four kids then. Yes, actually three. One of my sisters I never knew, she died when she was a little girl. When she was three years old, she died during the influenza epidemic. 17 years old. Yeah. So again, not to be morbid, but it was not an easy life. And as I said, in my mother's lifetime, she has, her husband has, and you know, the sort of thing you keep wondering, for a while you keep wondering how is she going to survive this one. There were so many tragic events and, you know, almost cruel events in her life. But she's just, she's a survivor. She just kept surviving them. And so as I say, it was a tough life. And sure, you know, they had fun out of it, but boy, they made their own fun. And they deserve so much credit for being such a tough, resilient people. And they did so much for this country, and they have gotten so little credit for it. And it's very sad in some ways. I hope with this movement now, Restoring Ellis Island, I hope that that becomes a major theme of Ellis Island, is what these immigrants contributed to this country. You know, with the Statue of Liberty, and it was, everybody got kind of carried away about America providing a haven for these people. These people brought a lot more to this country than this country gave to them. And again, I don't mean that in any bitter sense against this country, because I truly love this country. I just think this is the greatest form of government that anybody has ever dreamed of. And it's so amazing that it has worked so well for these 200 years. And I get all exercised about it sometime, and I get on a soapbox, and people tell me, you know, what's the matter? Don't you like this country? And I say, yeah, I like it so much that I get so upset when I see people trying to subvert what it could be, you know. And when selfishness, you know, becomes so obsessive, that it really hurts me because I just think this is such a, you know, physically it's such a beautiful country. Your father later on, before he died, did he assess any of the greatness of America? Oh, yeah. Yeah, he did. He, I guess if you were to summarize it, my father was an American that happened to have been born in Sweden. He came to America because he wanted, he came to America because he wanted to get out of Sweden. And then he came to America, and he really, he really did love this country. My mother, on the other hand, is, she is legally an American, but she is a lady who lived for 16 years in one country and, what, 76 years in another country, and she is still a Swede. That is her homeland. Sweden is where she belonged. But she was 16, though. You would think she was. That's right. And you don't know what's left. Strangely, I never, the years after the war, while my dad was still alive, you know, everybody in Rockford was going back to Sweden to visit. And my mother would, I don't know how many times she would mention it, you know, and ask my dad. My dad's, his whole philosophy was he didn't want to go back. He had nothing to go back for. He didn't even want to go back to visit. And, you know, she would say, well, you know, we've got to go see the homeland. He said, this is my home. So that's exactly how he felt. And, but to her, home is still Sweden. And it's not unusual. I, in Wilhelm Moberg's book, The Immigrant, I remember in one of the books when the mother of the family died and they buried her outside with the birch tree, and that was the closest she had been to home, that Sweden was still her home. And I didn't, it was just a very short time ago, my mother, in reminiscing, I, it suddenly dawned on me, she never really wanted to come here. She came, she had a sister that was here. And my mother worked in a coat factory in Gothenburg. She was a very good seamstress. And she was obviously also a very attractive young lady. They wanted her to do some modeling for the coats. And her mother didn't want her to. Then at the same time, somebody wanted her to go on the stage in a small theatrical troupe, which she really wanted to do. And, of course, you know, her mother just wouldn't absolutely hear that. So my mother wrote to her sister and said, I want to come to America. She evidently did it because she was just mad at her mother at that time. And she said that. She didn't think anything about it until a month or so later she got a letter from her sister with a ticket. And then she had to do it. And she was here in Rockford also? Yeah, she had come to Rockford. Her sister's name was? Her sister's name was Hilda. And she was, oh, boy, I guess about eight, ten years older than my mother. And Hilda had, even in Sweden, Hilda had, she had worked in Germany for a while. And, oh, she was engaged to a policeman in Sweden for a while. And, again, I guess his family wouldn't let him marry her, although they had one or two children by that time, too. And so somehow or another Hilda then married a guy named Carl Anderson, and they then came to America. So you met them in Rockford? Oh, yes. My Aunt Hilda is a very strong part of my childhood. She was the closest thing I had to a grandmother. And I could always go over and see my Aunt Hilda. And my aunt never talked English. She never learned English. She always talked Swedish. But she was just the kindest lady. And, you know, I just always had that very warm feeling. I had a cousin. My Aunt Hilda and her husband Carl had adopted a girl, and this girl, whose name was Gurley, her son Dick, and I were about a year apart, and we were just great friends. And they lived out of town, but he would come to Rockford for a month or so every summer and live with his grandma, who was Hilda. So every day I'd go over. We were, you know, that close, so I'd go over, and Dick and I would play together. And so those were some very, very happy memories. So you were brought up on Swedish then for a few years there? Yeah. Your parents, did they speak English? They spoke Swedish to each other quite a bit. My dad always, he made a point of speaking English. He wanted to speak English. But still, when they were with friends, they reverted to Swedish because they could express themselves much more easily in Swedish. And my mother particularly always took great comfort, you know, and still does to this day. Yeah, in Swedish. David Kallini mentioned something interesting for me. I asked him why did the socialist group peter out, in other words, extinct after a few years in the 30s. And he said it was because of the language. The immigrants that came in the 20s, they just weren't converted to English fast enough. That could well be. Because they probably didn't understand what they were talking about in English. That's right. That's a good point. They said they died completely. Yeah. It was like talking to the wall, you said. There was no... Yeah. Because you remember him. He seems to be a well-read person and a good talker. Oh, sure. You bet he is. And Harry Anderson was another one. Yeah. No, Dave was a self-taught man. Dave, many things about Dave Kallini and my dad would be similar. Yeah, the attitudes and yeah. Yeah. So do you remember if they had a meeting place or did they met? The socialists? Yes. That I don't know. Again, see, I was born in 26. By the time I could understand anything, you know, that would have been well into the 30s and that was... But no, I really don't know. And I... I don't... So your dad came into a Sunstein later on and retired from there? Yeah. No, actually he was still working when he died. Oh, I see. Yeah. And there was not a black mark on him that he had belonged to the... No. At that time? No. He was gone? No. No, no. That was nothing. Because then the Union were already in there in the Civil War. Sure. Yeah. Sure. Oh, yes. UAW was... But again, let's see now. Was it the UAW then? I guess it was. Yeah, because UAW was a division of... No, they weren't CIO. Because when the CIO and the... The American Federation of Labor. Yeah. When the AFL, when they merged. I remember my dad wasn't... Because AFL, that was a tradesman's union and a CIO was more of a laborer's. They had... Before the Second World War, there was not too much activity then. In other words, there were unions, but... Yes....not strong enough to... No, I don't think they were. Although in the third... In FDR's term. Yeah. And he, of course, he was somewhere between a hero and a god for most of the... Well, do you remember that when people came together, they talked about him? FDR, oh, my goodness, yes. Oh, yeah. I've said that, you know, jokingly. When I was a kid, you know, if you went into a house and found two of three things, if you found a picture of Gustav Adolf or a picture of FDR or a can of Hills Brothers coffee, you knew you were in the right house, because that was undoubtedly a Scandinavian house. Oh, yeah, FDR was... Oh, gee, that's a whole other story. So, there was the best representative they could ever wish for then. Yeah, I really... I think so. I think so. Because he had the connection with the banking people. He came from a banking family, of course. Yeah, yeah, phenomenal, phenomenal story. You would think there would be something that would set him back in the workers' eyes, but it didn't. No, no, no, he had this charisma that transcended, you know, any heritage on his part. So, you remember the radio fire? Oh, gosh, yes. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah, you know, during the 30s, again, an observation I made, on a summer night, you could walk down almost any street in southeast Rockford on a summer's night when the doors and windows were open and it was hot, and you could hear one of FDR's fireside chats or you could hear a Joe Lewis fight, you know, just walking up and down the street, because every house had a radio on, and you could hear it from every house. And so, yeah, that was a big thing. So, people participated and then... Oh, yes, sure, and the NRA, the Blue Eagle, that was all over. Oh, boy, everybody had one of those. What was that, the Blue Eagle? Yeah, this was the National Recovery Act. That was one of Roosevelt's first acts, and its symbol was this blue eagle, kind of a stylized blue eagle. But this poster, that was up in all the stores, all the factories, everywhere. Everybody subscribed to the National Recovery Act. I think that was the one that encompassed, you know, the bank holiday, closing the banks. It really, what it was, it was one of the first acts that gave FDR this unusual power as a president that wasn't at all intended. That was during his first 99 days. Yeah, right. Yeah, boy, that had the shake. It's amazing, though, how this guy could get through so many things in such a short of a time. Yes, it is. In three months. Just unbelievable, unbelievable. But the country was probably in such a bad shape that they didn't know what to do. And the country must have been absolutely ready for a change, and a drastic change. It had to be at a point where it said, you know, I don't care what this leads to. It's got to be better than what we've got now. Because the people in Mali, they were bad off, too. You bet they were. Maybe the worst of the You bet. You bet. So and, again, it was, you know, it's awfully easy in retrospect to see why things happened. But there were so many things, as you said, the radio, that was the right instrument at the right time for that right person. He was the first man that really knew how to use that, that medium. So they would have taken much longer if they would have done it. Oh, sure it would have. He would have never played in print media the way he did on radio. And can you imagine what he would have been like on television? You know, he would have made Ronald Reagan look like a, can anybody make Ronald Reagan look like a, don't get me started on that. But, but, yes, it was, it was the right medium at the right time for the right person. So people felt good with him. In other words, they trusted him. Sure, you bet they did. Again, I'm generalizing. The people that I knew, the people that I grew up with, one of my memories, you know, and it's inconsequential in a way except what it means. I can't remember if it was the second or the third election, but election night, presidential election night, that was a great big thing, and we used to go over to, my folks' very best friends was Adolph and Esther Carlson. And Adolph was a self-employed house painter, and that guy was a, he was a kick. He was one of the most interesting and vital men I've ever known in my life. He was so funny. He was kind of like a Swedish Groucho Marx. He just went off in all directions. But anyway, we used to go over there for election night, and they would, Esther would make a cake, you know. You always had to have a cake, and a beat-up cake with little pictures of FDR in the cake and the American flag sticking out of it, and of course a couple of Swedish flags too sticking out of it. But, I mean, this was important stuff. You didn't fool around. I mean, this, FDR was, like I said, he was right up there with Gustav Adolph. So he had good allies then in the Swedish Army? Oh yes, oh absolutely, absolutely, yeah. Do you think there was a uniting factor then in Rockford? Because the Italians, they were democratic. Yeah, yeah, that's the... They formed a... Yeah, again, at that time, if there was possible to have any sort of alliance, that would have been it. Because before your time in the early 20s, then there were fights against the Italians. Oh, they still were then. Yeah, you know, oh my God. You don't remember in the 30s though, were there any... Oh sure, sure. You know, it filtered down to us too. When I was in school... In high school I suppose you could have... Oh well, even in grade school. You know, you were always halfway leery of any Italian kid. You know, they were okay. You could talk to them, but geez, you know, don't get close to them. Well, to this day, my mother's greatest fear in life is, you know, inhaling garlic. And of course, the Italians, they ate garlic, so you couldn't even... You know, there used to be two movie theaters down on South Main Street in Rockford, the Capitol and the Rialto, and that was in the Italian neighborhood. And geez, no Swedish mother would let her kid go to one of those because they'd get exposed to garlic in there and they'd probably die right in the seat, you know. So, you know, it was still there. And my dad, he was one of the least prejudiced men I've ever known in my life. But he would get so mad sometime at somebody he'd work with. And if the guy was an Italian, that just made it all that much worse, you know. So, oh, yes, that was still there. But, as I say, if there was any force that would reconcile them, it would have been the Democratic Party at that time. Then they had a unison bond that they can think about the same lines. Yeah, that's right. That's right. But there was also a common expression, though, that if you were Catholic, you were a Democrat. Was there something that the Swedes... because a lot of Swedish immigrants that came here, they became Republicans, like you said. Oh, sure they did. They were not associated with the Democrats. It was a bad affiliation. Oh, you bet it was. You bet it was. For some of them, I mean. Yeah. That's very definitely. Because I know some Democrats said that some of their best friends came as farmhands, you know, from Sweden and they became Republicans immediately. Oh, sure. Or they shared all the money. It was a matter of social acceptance because, as I say, it was okay to be a Democrat. But you had to fight for it in other ways. You had to fight for it. You didn't want to make... I suppose it would be almost like being gay nowadays. It's okay to be gay, but, jeez, don't tell anybody, you know. So it was kind of a social stigma, really. So the Republicanism would elevate you a little. To be a Republican, again, it's an observation that I made, but to be acceptable, you needed to be those three Cs. You needed to be from a covenant church, conservative, and what else? I forgot what the other one is now. To be from one of the, particularly the free church or the covenant church, and to be conservative politically, and to be Scandinavian, then you were wrong. They put you in impetus into the society. Yes, that's right. You talk about the three Cs. There was one act of Roosevelt that was not well liked, in other words, the CCC camps. You were not old enough to be out in one of them. No, no, no. Why were they against it? I don't know. You think it would be a good lesson for the young people? Yeah, I've never heard that much talk against it. Well, they abolished it after a few years. Oh, yeah, yeah. So there was a lot of opposition to it. Oh, I'm sure it was. And if it was, I'm sure it was because it smacked of communism, in a way. The reason probably was that it sent, like, Rockford kids now. They sent them to Washington, D.C. or— It could well have been. Maybe their parents were better. I don't think I, again, I'm talking about something I don't have any direct knowledge of, but I suspect there weren't many people from Rockford that were involved in the CCC. Those that I know that were in, were from rural areas, mostly up in northern Wisconsin, where there was nothing but rocks and trees, and a lot of those guys went into the CCCs. Because they were—it was a livelihood for them, though. Oh, sure, sure. You were adventurous to come out and— Maybe their parents were afraid to lose sight of them. It could well be, could well be. But, you know, that's true. I'll bet if we got down to it, there weren't many people from Rockford that were involved in it. So they were able to scratch up some newspaper delivery or— Yeah, I suppose, I suppose. Or grocery stores. So you went through high school, then, and your sisters the same way. Yep. And you continue on, then, after— No, when I got out of high—I graduated from high school in January of 1945, and I was in the Army of March of 1945. You were drafted almost— Oh, yes. I was 18 in December of 1944. And no dependents, really? No, no. So this was a part of life when you were in high school. You were, you know, you were going into the service as soon as you graduated, but— unless you were deferred. The interesting thing, too, in my senior year in high school, just before I turned 18, my dad came home from Sunstrand one night, and that— it was so surprising because it was unlike him. But he told me, he said, you get over to Sunstrand tomorrow. He said, don't bother about school. He said, they've got an opening in the tool room to be an apprentice tool and die maker. He says, you go over and sign up for that. You can get it. And I said, geez, you know, I've got to go to school. No, don't worry about school. And I said, well, you know, why should I do something like that? I'm going to be drafted as soon as I'm 18. Well, no, that's got nothing to do with it. This is an opportunity that you'll never have again. And I said, well, you know, I want to graduate from high school. You don't need to graduate from high school. He said, you're—you aren't that good of a student. You know, why do you want to— And he was really insistent about it because this was— you know, in his world, this was a very strong opportunity. But I—I talked to the high school principal about it, you know, and he kind of confirmed what I was—he said, my goodness. He said, you're, you know, a month or two away from graduating. You're going to be in the service the minute you get out of school. He said, goodness sake. He said, don't— And by that time, too, I really in my heart, I knew I never wanted to go back into that shop atmosphere. I just, you know, I couldn't see that. Had you tried the— Oh, I worked in—you know, during World War II, I worked in four or five of the major industries. During the summer months, then? During the summer months and after school because, you know, they just needed workers so badly that we could go anywhere we wanted to. And then I worked, oh, summers in industry, and I worked—the month or so I was out of school, I worked in a factory, and oh, boy, it was—you know, I just didn't want it. I didn't want to go back to the— You didn't fit into that— No, no. It was so confining, and again, you know, I don't mean to sound facetious about it, but I just knew it wasn't for me. But anyway, the principal told me that. He said, you stay the way you're going. And boy, that really hurt my dad. That's the first time I ever hurt my father by going against his wishes. But he was probably afraid that you were going to lose the position in life. That's exactly right. This was an opportunity that wouldn't come up that often. But anyway, yes, then I did—I graduated—I was 18 in December. I graduated in January, and then in March I was drafted into the Army. But then, yes, when I got out of the service, then I worked in Chicago for two years in a bank. A man that I knew when I was overseas worked at this bank in Chicago, and when I came home, I called him to say hello, and he immediately recruited me, and I went into their management training program and, you know, took a lot of banking courses, oddly enough, then. And then after two years, then I came back to Rockford. I wanted to come back to Rockford. And then I worked at a bank in Rockford, and again, I took—I didn't take any formal schooling. I did go to Rockford College for a number of courses in accounting and, you know, many other things and banking courses and that. And then I evolved into the photography business. Just like a hobby then? Yes, it started—I started as a hobby, really, when I was overseas, when I was in the service. And then, yes, it was a hobby, and I just kept working with it. So, no, I don't have a college degree. I don't even know how many college credits I have, but, you know, I've taken a lot of different courses and things. So it's— And then you stayed with photography, then? Yes, yes, I've been— Ever since? Yes, well, no, I did a lot of—a number of things in between there, but generally speaking, yes, about the past 15 years, photography has been my major business. So you're glad you didn't go into Sunstrance then? Oh, yeah, yeah, oh, sure. Do you think that breaks a person's will, more or less? I'm sure there's a lot of people sitting behind a bench who doesn't really like it. Oh, sure. Oh, there has to be. There has to be. Because it's a complete, like, prison life. Well, and there's an industry in Rockford, Woodward Governor Company. I don't know if you've come in contact— I heard the name and it's— Okay. It's a tremendously well-respected industry. They make controlled unit governors. They're evidently the best in the world. Their quality is just superior, you know. They have a workforce that's so loyal out there. But it's such a paradox. You know, they are—the management is very conservative and very anti-communistic. But by the same token, they have the perfect communistic state out there. They do. They have their own doctor, their own dentist, their own barber. You go to work for Woodward Governor and you subscribe to their theories and their laws completely, and you don't deviate. So there is no union at all at all? Oh, my goodness, no. Oh, gee. You know, you'd spit the bread. But they are happy with it today. That's exactly right. The people that are there are so happy with that protected environment. At one time, I sold real estate, and I sold a house to a young man that worked there. And before he and his wife could decide whether they wanted to buy this house, they had to talk to the finance committee at Woodward Governor to see if they would allow them to buy that house. And I said something about, doesn't that make you feel a little bit hammed in? He said, oh, no, no. He said, they're looking out for us. He said, I like it there. He said, I like it very much. He said, they do a lot of things for us. He said, they have a political committee. He said, they study all the candidates and all the issues, and then they advise us how they think we should vote. He said, I don't have to go through all that. Oh, boy. It's almost like you're Harish Krishna, what do you call it? Yeah, yeah. But, again, that's why my getting a long way, going a long way to get to a point, it is just there are people who are so comfortable and so happy in a structured environment, and I'm not. I never have been. I'm more of an independent person. But that hasn't prevented me from looking at some of these people and envying their position sometimes. I'm at a point in life now where many of my friends are retiring, and retiring with tremendous benefits that I'm never going to have. I don't know if I'm ever going to be able to retire. I hope my health keeps up where I don't want to retire. But you can keep working, though. I certainly hope so, because if I can't, I'm in deep trouble. The same age group as you now, being 60. Yeah, 60, exactly. Do they really feel happy, though? I mean, they have a big pension. Can they do everything they want, actually? I don't know. Again, it depends on the age. It's going to be too expensive. Again, you get down into personal philosophies. There's people that I have known practically all my life. They were old people when we were 25 years old, and so very afraid to do anything, and so very afraid what people would think of them. And that's good. There's nothing wrong with that. And there are people that could afford to do things that are afraid to do it, because they don't want to spend the money. That's not my philosophy, but they're comfortable with it. I don't know. You can't say how someone else should live their life. As I say, when I see some of these people that are— I have a brother-in-law who's 55 years old.