 One little fella died before I was born. And I was born in 1884. What date and month? What? What date? Well, it was Illinois. Illinois, on a farm in Ogle County. That would be south of Stillman Valley on the Meridian Highway. My father farmed there for 42 years. And he lived there all the time. I was born there on the farm. And my father, he come from Sweden over here when he first landed in New Jersey. Then he got a job. There was about 30 other Swede boys that left Sweden and come over here. And when they got off of the boat in New York, their agent met them. And he says, I've got work for you fellas on the railroad. They're building new railroads in New Jersey. New York State, New Jersey. So he took all 30 of them, and my father with. And went over to New Jersey, the state of New Jersey. And worked on the railroad there. They were building new railroads. And I think he was there about two years. And then the railroad got finished there. And they were building a new railroad at Lockport, Joliet, Illinois. So he shipped the whole gang of them over there. And my father come with him over there. When they landed in Lockport, that's just right next to Joliet. Why, some of the Swede boys that he was with in the company with him, they had friends living in Rockford. And they wrote a card to the friends here in Rockford. They were there. And the friends wrote right back. And says, come over to Rockford. It ain't too far. And there's lots of work here. You can get good pay, good work here. So then my father and all the other boys, they quit the railroad and come to Rockford. And when they come to Rockford, there was a farmer down there from Ogle County. He heard that there were immigrants coming in. He wanted help. So he rode horseback up from the farm up to Rockford. And he met all them boys there. And he looked them all over. Of course, this fellow, his name was Walker. He was an American, see. And he looked them all over, asked them a few questions. And so then we got done talking to the boys. He pointed at my father, and he said, that's the fellow right there. I want him. I want him. So my father went with him and walked by the side of the horse. The fellow was riding horseback. My father walked right by the side of the horse all the way to Stillman Valley, on the farm south of Stillman Valley, see. Now, after... So why did this man pick your father? Did he look big and husky or... My father looked more sharp to him, and he answered questions in that way. So he picked him? Well, my father couldn't... He had learned a few lessons in the American language, but he was Swedish. When he was in Lockport and worked on the railroad there, he sent a ticket back to Sweden to my... His sweetheart was my mother then. Gustava? Gustava. Felt. They came over, and they were married in Lockport. In the Lutheran church? Yeah. It was all Lutheran church. My father, in the beginning, he went to the Lutheran church. Even when he was on the farm, he used to take a horse and a buggy and come to Rockford and go to the first Lutheran church in Rockford. How far is that? Twelve miles? About 15 miles, say. 15 miles south of Rockford. They used to come up there and went to the Lutheran church. Then, in the meantime, there was other Swede fellows down there that got together, and they went to the homes, and they had meetings in the homes. My father and mother, they were religious. They went to homes. There were five people. There were five people. My father and mother were two of the five that started up what they called later, they called it the Swedish Free Church. They all come from the Lutheran church. They had nothing against the Lutherans, but the Lutheran church, they had a little church in the city of Stillman Valley. That's a little country town. There was a free church there? No, it was a Lutheran church. A Lutheran church in Stillman Valley? There, where they... There was no Swedish, though? There was Swedish, all Swedish. They wanted these fellows, there were several Swedish fellows that went to the church, and they thought they wanted to have a church of their own. So they organized a free church in Stillman Valley, but they went from home to home and had meetings. Then my father, he was acquainted with some of the farmers down there, the landowners. He asked them for a place to build a church, and this fellow that owned the land, he gave them to the church. He gave them to my father, where they could build a church on it. These fellows that first started together down there, they chipped together money, each one of them, what they needed money to buy lumber, but they built it themselves. They all went together and they built a church, a little church down there. They went to their own church down in Stillman Valley. Now, the reason they went to the Sarden or the other church, they had nothing against the Lutheran church, the Lugud church, but they thought they wanted a little more life in the church. Now, the church that my father was confirmed in, he was confirmed in what they called a state church. Rydaholm. Rydaholm Småland. It is a church in the country like. It was them there in Sweden, they call it Stortjärkan. That's the state church. My father was confirmed there when he was little. My mother, she went there and she was confirmed in that same church, in Rydaholm Småland. The records are there, if they got records in Sweden, the records are there. Gustava Felt, she was a girl, and my father was John Ring. The records show that they was in Rydaholm and were confirmed in that church. I was in that church just when we went through Sweden. We stopped there for one day. I had a cousin over there that took me to the church to see where my father and mother had been confirmed. Did you visit the farm they came from? Did you visit the place they came from in Rydaholm? No, I visited the church. We was only visiting there about three days in Sweden. We went down to that church just to see what was in there. I know there was a pulpit there and around the pulpit down below they had a bench where people could go down and kneel on their knees. Right there in the church. That's where they got started on that there. Do you know the reason why your parents left from Sweden? Well, I'll tell you. I had my father's brother. He came over here after my father came here. He came over here and he got married in Stillman Valley. Then there was another brother that came over here. He was a tailor. You either had to be a shoemaker or a tailor over there. He was a tailor, the one. He did no work for around Stillman Valley. So he went to Kansas and settled down there. That's where he lived until he died. My father's brother. What was his name? Frank. Frank Ring. Frank Ring. He was my father's brother. Do you know where in Kansas? Where in Kansas? In Kansas where? The name of the place? Well, in Kansas City is what it was. Kansas City, Kansas. He lived down there until he died. He came back once or twice in his family just to visit. This fellow, he was my uncle, my father's brother. He liked whiskey, you know. He was a drinking man. His wife, she come to visit my father. She complained about him. He'd get the check for working. He'd go to the saloon and he'd buy whiskey. They took all his money. He'd come home and didn't have money to buy groceries with. So she complained about that. But whiskey was what downed him. He finally died then. He lived quite a number of years. What year did it come over, your parents? Were they married in Sweden? Your folks, I mean your father and mother, were they married in Sweden? No, they were married in Lockport. Lockport, yeah. Lockport, Illinois. So your father, now, what year did he come over? In the 1880s? Well, my father's father, he never did come over. He was an old soldier in Sweden. He was a soldier in Sweden. That's my grandfather on my father's side. He soldiered in Sweden for 33 years and 10 months. Then he was retired on a Swedish pension. The pension was small, but it was some anyway. His name, when he first went into the army, his name was, I don't know what he was now, Halm. Halm. I know H-A-L-M. Or H-E-L-M, I don't know. But his name was Halm. When my grandfather in Sweden, my father's father, he was in with the army, the captain of the company, there were so many men in the company, he says, I got another man by the name of Halm in there. He says, we can't have two men with the same name in the company. So he said, from this day on, he pointed at my grandfather, your name from now on is H-E-L-M, or Ring. Yeah, your name is Ring. That's how he got the name Ring, see. And so he went by that name all the time. And then my father, of course, he had that name and lived in the Simmon Valley all his life, was Ring, John Ring. He had a family. He raised a family of 10. Your father? Yeah, my father and mother had, they raised 10 children until they were full grown. How many boys? There were five boys and five girls in the family. Yeah. There was a big family. There was a big family. Was you one of the younger ones, or? Well, let's see, there was one, two, three girls, and one boy born after me. Oh, I see. The ones, the first two was two boys, then there were two girls, and then the boy was born, and then there was another little fellow that he only lived six months. He died before I was born. He died in September. He died, he was born in December, also December 26th, but he only lived long until he died. Them days the doctor said, Jernfeber, now that's what, he died from that. He died. Then he died in September, and I was born right there in December, next after that, then. Next after. But that was all, and then the whole family grew up, it was all full grown, see. So, how big of a farm was it? It was 220 acres in the farm. It was a big one. It was a big farm, a lot of work. I worked hard on the farm. I worked hard because when the children, when my father first started the farm, he had to hire a man to help, a hired man, you know. Then when the children grew up big enough so they could help, well then he didn't need the hired man. So then like myself, I grew up, I would help my father on the farm. And my father farmed there on that one farm for 30 years. I was born there, and I stayed there until my father quit farming. I was 27 years old then. I didn't have wages, but he used to give me sometime a dollar to spend for spending money and like that, you know. But I didn't have no wages. How many years of schooling did you have then? You went to school down there? Oh yeah. How many years? I went to a little country school down there. It was two miles and a quarter down in the country, a little school house, a small one. It had one teacher, and the teacher, she had $30 a month. That was her salary, $30 a month. And she'd teach all the children, the oldest to the little ones. Did you go every day? Yeah, I had to go every day to school. I had to walk two miles and a quarter to school and then walk home. We had no automobiles them days, you know. But we used to walk. Nowadays, the children don't have to walk. They have buses that fix them up. There was nothing like that then. Were there any more Swedish families around there? Oh yeah. I'll tell you, there were some other Swedish families that came there. They'd come from Sweden, and they'd come to my father. They stayed with my father, and then he got them work, you know. Especially a lot of girls that came over, young girls. They'd come over from Sweden, and they lived with my father and mother. Them days, the only work they had was housekeeper. The rich people had them for housekeepers. Here in Rockford? No, no, around Stillman Valley on the farms there. So that was a little small farm? That was in the beginning. They worked as housekeepers. And then, as I say, I grew up and I helped on my farm. I stayed right with my father until I was 27 years old. How about your brothers? Did they leave? Well, the oldest one, the first one, when they got... My oldest brother, the first one, Victor, his name was, he was a minister. And he went to school in Chicago. Free church? It was a Bible school, he went there. Moody Bible School? They called it for the two fellows, Elmquist and Princell. There were two old fellows that were ministers. They started that school. Do you remember Princell? Yeah, I remember Princell, yeah. I remember Princell and Elmquist. And my father went to that school and took up ministry. And during the time he went to the school there, he used to go out and they'd send him some different places to preach for Sunday. And he was up to Waukegan, one free church in Waukegan. And they sent word right back to the school they want to hire him. So he hired out and worked as a minister for that in Waukegan. But that was in the beginning. Then he changed over a little bit later and got hired out in other churches. But he died when he was 35 years old. What happened then? Well, the doctors then claimed he had walking typhoid fever. He caught it, whatever it was. He caught a cold and he got a typhoid fever and he died. We were still living on the farm then, see. Then he was sent out. My father went to get his body and bring it back and buried in the cemetery down in the Stillman Valley, see. Yeah, but the rest of the children, they all come to Rockford and worked in different work and like that there. But you had to stay on the farm? I stayed to stay and help my father. So your dad, did he build his own house then in the beginning there? He built his own house in Rockford, but where he lived on the farm, the farmer that owned the farm. There was already a house there? He furnished the house. And the house there, I was born in the house there, yeah. So after 26 years on the farm, your dad moved into Rockford? What happened? My father was on the farm for 30 years. He had a sale. I'll tell you, my father had been there long enough. In them days, the farmer didn't get much money. Oats was 15 cents a bushel. Corn was 30 cents a bushel. And they sold hogs to the market, you know, to fatten hogs and sold them. The top price was $4 a hundred, or four cents a pound they called it. And the price he made, the money made on the farm wasn't very much, you know. They didn't make very much, you know. But he done all he could. And I helped him. I know when my father quit farming that time. That was my home, see. So I says, well, my father, I says, if you want to stay, I'll still stay with you and help you. No, he says, I don't want to take your time. You got your life ahead of you. You have to get a job or you'll make money. So that's why he decided on quitting farming. Then I come to Rockford. I come to Rockford and worked in the factory here about five years. And I got acquainted with a sergeant on the police department in Rockford. His name was Joe Briner. And I helped him one time, whatever it was he did. I think he wanted to get an examination or something, and they tried to frame on him some of the leaders of the police department. So he come to me for help, and I did. I went down and testified right in front of the judges of the police department, the head of the police department, that I knew Joe Briner. And I said he's a good, honest man. And finally then was made a sergeant in the beginning and then a lieutenant and then a captain, you know. But then after that, he got after me. He says, I want you to get on the police department. That was in 1920. And I says, well, I don't think I'd pass the examination. He says, if you pass, he said, you will. I want you to get on. So he said, there's going to be an examination for new policemen. He says, I want you to take it. And there were five fellows that took the examination, same time I did. And there was only one more other fellow in myself that passed it. The rest of them didn't pass, you know. Was it a hard test? Yeah, so when I passed the examination, well, then the chief of the police said, you come to work, he says, tomorrow night. It was all night work then. I had to work nights. The first three years, I worked nights all together. Was this Bargrain? Yeah, Bargrain. He was the chief. He was a Swede. He was the chief, Augie Bargrain. But this guy that you helped out, was he an Irishman or an American? No, he was Swedish. Augie Bargrain was a Swede. Yeah, but the other guy that you helped? The next one that followed him was Charlie Manson. He was a Swede. And then after he retired, because he had to retire on account of age, so they had to pick a new man on the police department. They picked Bengtsson. Fulke Bengtsson. Fulke Bengtsson. He was a chief then. But the guy that you helped out, what nationality was he? Was he an Irish? No, no, he was a Swede. The guy you helped, what was his name? Yeah, Fulke Bengtsson. Yeah, but the guy that you helped out, the guy that you helped? Oh, he was German. Oh, German. Yeah, he was German. I thought they were all Swedish in the police department at that time. So I went on the police department and got to working, and I was on the police department for 23 years. 23 years? Yeah, and then at my age, I got older, I retired. But you were tall and husky at that time. I was husky and strong, and that's what he wanted, you see. And I know when I first got to be a policeman, I was a patrolman on the beach. You walked the streets then? Walking the beach. And then they finally put me on the corner of State and Main, working traffic. They didn't have no stoplights or anything, and they had to have somebody blowing the whistle for the traffic to go. I was on that traffic there for five years, see, working traffic. And so then they finally picked me to get on the detective bureau. I had done some pretty good police work on there when I was a policeman, when I was there working traffic. And the fellas used to complain about pickpockets, you know. And I used to watch pretty close, you know. You mean on the street? Yeah. On the sidewalk? Yeah, I was in on there. I could see and watch, and I always seen that these pickpockets, you know, they'd always push in crowd trying to get on the bus. The bus would stop to pick them up, people, you know. And when everybody wanted to get on, why, then, they'd see a pickpocket. They were pushing in that way and going through the pockets. And I seen with my own eyes that he'd had a pocketbook from a guy. So then I nailed the guy. Right on the spot. Yeah, I nailed him. He had the pocketbook on him, see. So I had done some pretty good work, you know. Finally, then the chief called me and he said, I'm doing pretty good work, he says, I want you to be in the detective bureau. It was Bargrain? Yeah, Bargrain. So I went in and got to be a detective then for, I was a detective for 12 years, see. 11 years, yeah. And until I retired, see. But there was something about the police work that I liked pretty good, see. So you remember 7th Street then and all the traffic down there? Yeah, yeah. Yeah, but you know, now on 7th Street they had one policeman, he was a Swede fellow, Oli Erikson. He was a good man too, but he was on 7th Street there all the years that I remember until he finally quit, see. And it happened one time I went over, well, several times I went over on 7th Street and talked to Oli Erikson, see. I kind of liked the old fellow. He was particular around them Swedes, because 7th Street was all Swedish, you know. And Oli Erikson, he would make them behave too, see. So I kind of liked him. But on 7th Street, I never worked, was never a beat on 7th Street. But I was a beat on the west side of the river, on the different beats, until they put me on a statement to work in traffic, I was a trafficman for five years. How about the west side now, where the Irish lived and the Italians? Did the Swedes work there too? Well, there were Sweden fellows that worked on the street. No problem. Oh yeah, there were some good, some good Swede fellows that were policemen. I worked with them, you know. They used to, they would tell me stuff and I'd tell them stuff, you know. And they helped each other, you know. And then you had a guy they called for Buss Albin. Buss Albin. Yeah. Do you remember him? Well, he wasn't a policeman, no. No, no, but he was a tough guy, they said. He was a tough one to handle. But you know that there was a policeman, you know, I don't say they were afraid of him, but they stayed away from him, you know. Well, they did. Yeah, because there was one time he, they had one policeman, he was an American, so he thought, I'm going to break that there, Bruce. So Bruce had been drinking a little bit, you know, and he got pretty loud, so this fellow told him to keep still and go home. He said, go home. And they got to fighting. And the first thing you knew, this fellow was laying on the ground and the airship was sitting on top of him. So finally some fellow come and told him, get off of him, get off. But I, that Bruce, I liked him pretty well, you know. And the funny part was, he told people, there was only one policeman that could arrest me and that was Ed Ring. You were not afraid? Yeah, but I'll tell you, I used to talk to him. So you were able to talk sweet then? Yeah, I could talk sweet. I could talk sweet and get along, get good in sweet. And so I used to, if I see that, oh, there might be trouble coming or something like that, I'd say, come on, I want to see something. So I'd go, oh, they start walking. Okay, he says, start walking with me and I'd go about 25 steps. He said, just a minute, he says, Ed. He says, is this a pinch? No, no, no, there's no pinch, I just want to talk to you. Okay, so I'd want to walk down the street. Finally, I send him home. He told, I said, go on home. I says, you don't have to if you don't want to, I'm just asking you to do that, get off of my beat. So he told people afterwards, Ed Ring was the only fellow that could pinch me. But it wasn't because I was strong. In connection with Ed Ring, Dr. Alvin Peterson. Alvin Peterson. You remember him? Oh, do I? He was a strong guy. And I tell you, I was never, I never acted like I wanted to behave or something like that. I used to talk to him. And he got to liking me. So if I told him, I says, I don't like the crowd here, I says, come on, walk down with me. He'd go along, see. But I never pinched him. So people, they had respect for the police 10 years ago? Yeah, they did. They had respect. But you know, there was something about the police work. I like police work. If I was a young man, I'd like to be a policeman again. I like police work. Do you remember in the early, during the war, First World War, there were some Swedish fellows, you know, the young ones that didn't want to go to war, they sent them to Bridewell, in Chicago. Do you remember that time? I know there was World War I. They were socialists. Yeah. I was, see, World War I, I... Were you drafted then? I was still on the farm, I think. You were not drafted? No. So... That was during Herman Hallstrom's time. Hallstrom, yeah. Yeah. Hallstrom was the mayor. Yeah, he was the mayor then. He was mayor for a good many years. Many years, yeah. Yeah. And he was a socialist. Yeah. But I never had no trouble with Hallstrom. I always... I tried to keep a respect, let him know that I was a respecter. Was he a good mayor? Huh? Was he a good mayor? Yeah. Hallstrom was a good fellow. I liked him that way. And... I know Hallstrom, he... Sometime when I got to work in the plainclothes, I had a partner always. Well, you were detective then? Yeah, so he... The fellow that I had to work with, it was all the two men together in a squad car, you know. And it's pretty hard to work with a fellow that was a good fellow. I had two guys, so I turned them in and they put him out of it. He took them out of it. I said, I don't want to work with him, that's all. So I know I had one fellow that was there, he was crooked. And I... I went in to Augie, who was the chief, Augie Barger. And I went in one day and I said, Chief, I want to ask you to put me back on the beat. He said, why do you want to go on the beat? I got a partner that is not honest. I said, I want to work with an honest man, and I can't work with him and see what he do, it's not honest. So Augie says, well, he says, I'll tell you, he always called me Eddie. You're never going to go on the beat, he said. Tomorrow you're going to have a new partner. I did, and the next day I got a new one. But they were crooked. I know that one guy, sometimes we picked up a fellow that was drinking pretty bad or something like that. There's a lot of fellows that I picked up that had been drinking, sweet fellows. I'd take them. I'd say, first thing I'd ask them, are you married? Yeah. Have you got children? Yes, I got three children. You need money to take care of them kids and not pay in the fine. I says, I'm going to take you home. And I take them home. Yeah, and so I used common sense. How much did they have to pay then in fine if they were arrested for drunkenness? Well, sometimes you get a bad drunk one, you know. I used to have a lot of times, a lot of times there used to be trouble between the man and the woman. Domestic trouble. Family trouble, they called it. And I used to hate having that because you come there to the house, the woman, I always said, first I want you to tell me your story. And after you get done, I'll have him tell his. And so the woman would always tell, but she goes out, hang her out, drinking and spending the money, and I'm trying to stop him. And so I says, well, now I'll tell you. And then I get to talk to the guy. Are you changing or going to be a good man? I said, you got a good wife here. I said, you got a good wife? Are you willing to change over and be a better man? And a lot of times he said, yes, I'm going to quit. I'm at the fault. And sometimes the guy got tough and he said, you ain't going to tell me what to do, nothing. So then I says to the wife, I says, I'm going to take him down and lock him up. Will you come down and reappear against him in court and tell the story? Yes. She says, I'll be down tomorrow at 10 o'clock, tomorrow morning. Okay. I take the guy down and lock him up. But if a guy wanted to talk sense, I'd have said, you better treat your wife nice. I used common sense to him, see. Were there many cases like that? Were there many cases like that years ago? Did you have a lot of problems like that? No. No? No. But I had a lot of calls of family trouble, they called it. Man and the woman were in disagreement, see. Was it more during the 20s than during the Depression? The Depression was hard on people, the Depression years. They didn't have a job and they had to... How about the prohibition? Prohibition? Yeah, was that good or was that bad, according to your... Well, the prohibition was... I don't know. I know that the prohibition was in effect when I was on there. But I'll tell you, the guys used to take and go to Beliott and they get all the whiskey they want. But they could pick it up there? And then they'd come back in Rockford and get pints for it, see. But they had bootleggers. They had bootleggers in Rockford. They had amongst the Italian people... They ran their business? They had stills. They made the whiskey, made the still, you know, they made the whiskey. Was that good whiskey? Yeah, during Prohibition, see. I was with... There'd generally be about four of us and we were going to knock off an Italian that had a still. On the West Side? Yeah, all on the West Side. Weren't you afraid to go in there? No, we were not going. I know one time I went on a... I'd go to the... A wrap on the door. Where the still was on the inside. I'd been tipped, you know. We used to get tips. People give me a tip. A lot of our work was for tips. I know one time I went, I wrapped on the door. I knew that place, they had a still there. And the Italian, he talked a little broken. He says, who's a speaker? He goes, who's speaking? He says, who's a speaker? And I used to... I learned some Italian words in Italian. And I say, una galuna di roba. That means, I want a gallon of stuff. And I'd hear he unlocked the door, opened the door. And I walked in. You were pretty sneaky. Yeah, but I'd go walk in. And then the guy, he put me fainted. When he sees me, he bleeds me. But I used to learn Italian language so I could fool them to get in. When I wrap on the door. Italian on the inside, he'd say, who's a speaker? I says, una galuna di roba. That means, I want a gallon of stuff. And the guy had unlocked it. You could hear him unlocking the stuff. Padlocks, I guess. So when you find a still, Don, how much were they finding? Did you took them down to the slammer? The guy you arrested, you arrested him on the spot then? Oh yeah, then they'd go into the federal court. Federal court. And the federal court, where there was a still. The city court had nothing to do with that. It was the federal court. Federal court. Whatever they called them now. Did you make the arrest then? Yeah, I made the arrest. You arrested him. Yeah, make the arrest. And then they would go in there and they'd destroy all the steel that they were making and stuff like that. Broke it up. Tore everything to pieces, you know. So they had to quit. But I know their federal government, they come in one time and they had detectives working with the police department. And there was one time in Rockford, they had 90 houses all over in the Italian district. 90 stills in the city of Rockford. And they were all making whiskey and making money at it. So you could hardly stop it then? Yeah, we had to get a still. We had to get pretty good information so we knew what we was doing. Otherwise they'd beat us, you know. I see. How about the Swedes now on the east side? Did they run any stills? No, the Swedes never had no stills. They couldn't compete with the Italians? Yeah. But the Swedes used to, well not all the Swedes, but a lot of the Swedes, they used to like to have their whiskey, you know. And they would buy it, you know. But was the whiskey good enough to drink so they don't get blind or sick? No, it was good enough to take and drink. It is no good because you take a whiskey that they make, they have to stand so many years before it gets better, you know. They always say that they call it 12-year-old and 10-year-old and 15-year-old. It was only a few hours old? Yeah, yeah. Now they have it just a few hours old. How about on the dances now, when the Swedish girls and the boys went to dances and the Italians and the Irish came in? Then there were fistfights. Yeah, at the dance hall? Yeah. Yeah, well they come in, I tell you, I know that there are dance halls on each side of the river there. That fellow running that dance hall, he used to, when I was working hours so I'd help him down there, I'd get paid for it, about $5, you know, to keep order, see. And I forget what in the world they called that place now, I forget the name. But they used to, a lot of the Swede fellows used to go to the dances, and American people in that way, and they wanted to dance and have a good time. But the people that came in, especially the Italians, they would come in there and then they'd be selling whiskey, selling whiskey right on them, you know. They'd have a bottle on them, some good guy'd want it. Well, when I'd see they'd begin to get kind of loud and noisy, well then I used to just tap them on the shoulder and say, out you go. Out you go. But how about the Italians now? Did they drink as much as the Swedish boys? Well, I'll tell you, they... Do you know the Swedes, they always got riled, you know, like the fistfights and stuff like that. Did the Italians do the same thing? Well, the Swedes, I don't think they drink too bad, you know. No? But they used to like to take it just for the fun of it, you know. But how about the Irish and the Italians, did they like to drink? No, the Italians, they never drank, the Italians, no. They didn't do that? No, they knew what the stuff was, nothing but poison. But the Irish, the Irish, once in a while they'd get to drinking. But they wasn't so bad. But I don't know, they... Whiskey is a good thing to have in the house. You know, when I got married, and I always kept whiskey in the pantry. I never drank it. But if somebody got sick, cold coming on, well then mix up something and take that, and the next morning they'd be okay, see. So you never used whiskey? No, I never cared for whiskey. I never was a drinker. I didn't mean to go out and drink and get drunk, no. So you were a good policeman then? Yeah, I was a police, I'm a police department. You were well known over Rockford? Yeah. And, but they, I know during the time I was a policeman, I was working on the west side of the river mostly all the time. All the time on the west. On the west side? West side, yeah. I see. But there was a heartbeat, or? There was a mixture of Irish and Americans. And then, on the west side of the river, then the Italians come in, and the Irish moved out. And then the Irish come in. Now, the black people come in, and they chase the Irish, I think. So they are out now then? Uh-huh. So at, um... Say, are we... So, you married, what year did you marry? I married in 1917. 1917. And I was married 49 years, my wife passed away. Was she of a Swedish background? Yeah, she was a Swedish girl. What was her name? Her first name was Hildur, H-I-L-D-U-R, and P-I-E-R-S-O-N, Pearson. Pearson. But she pronounced it Pearson, P-I-E-R-S-O-N. But she was a good girl, she was a good housekeeper. But she got something, whatever it was, brain fever or something like. And she, I forget what in the world they called that there. I had a visiting nurse used to come every week, and help in the house, and help to give her a bath, and help her to dress, and help like that. You had three boys and they were all in the service? Yes, sir. The oldest one, the oldest boy, he enlisted in the Marines. He's still living today, he lives in Rydot, little town. And he enlisted as a Marine. And the middle boy, he took the Army, he took the draft. He signed up for the draft and when they called him, they took him in the camp. And they had him out in California and they sent him over across to fight the Japs, you know. He got injured over there, he was in the hospital there. Shrapnel, shrapnel, the Italian, or the Japanese, you know, they were fighting with shrapnel, you know. And my son told me, he said that we would run and the first to be holding it out, we'd dove in the hole, hide. And he said, them Japs, they knew that and they'd shoot these bombs over, kept dropping bombs. He says, there's one bomb hit on the side of, killed the boy right, he said, I was laying right by the side of the boy, and they killed him. Injured me so bad, they put him in the hospital there. They had my son in the hospital down there for quite a while. Then the war come to an end. Then he come home. He was home for a while, but he finally passed away then. But he got injured in a war so bad. But I got two yet today, one boy, the youngest boy, he enlisted in the Navy. And he was on one of them big boats on the Atlantic Ocean. And he was in the Navy there until they got the time in, and got the time in, and he quit that. And she made it tough for the old man, you know. Your wife's parents. Yeah, and then the children, they had three girls and one boy. The boy, he was no good. But the three girls, the two, they're all dead now, see. And my wife, she, with her father and her mother, they were fighting to hold the family. And my wife, she picked the father. She always took my father's side. And the other girls, she took the mother's side. So there was trouble, you know. Drift apart. Had trouble. How did you meet your wife? What church did you join now when you came to Iraq? Well... The free church? No, my wife, when I joined, no, I never joined the free church. Although I went there when I first came to Rockford. I went there about five years. They had a preacher by the name of Gus Johnson. Texas Johnson. Texas Johnson, yeah. He was a preacher there. I liked him. I always liked him pretty well, so I went there. And then my wife, my wife, she was brought up in the Mission Church. Mission Tabernacle, they called it in those days. Now they call it the... First Covenant. Covenant. They call it the Covenant Church now, see. But the First Mission Church was where she was brought up in. So she belonged to that church. So then after we moved and got a better home, out on Sacrament 18th Avenue, first level, on the head, and I said, now, what would you like, church would you like to go? Well, she said, I'd like to go to the Broadway Covenant now. So we both joined the Broadway Covenant, and we went there until she died, see. There's a lot of nice people in that covenant, church, Broadway Covenant, yeah. But I never joined the free church. And I used to go to the free church in the Stillman Valley when I was younger. They had a free church, little church, that had 30 members, all they had, you know. So your parents now, are they buried out in Stillman Valley? What? Your parents, did they stay on in Stillman Valley? No, they moved to Rockford. When he sold out the farm and quit farming, well, then they both moved to Rockford. He built a house on 12th Street, 125 12th Street. And I lived home with him there about five years. And then I got acquainted with my wife, and she went to church, and I went to church. So I got to go with her and finally married her then, see. So how did you manage now to get to this high age of 102 years of living? Well, I never thought that I'd live to be 102. You're in good health. Yeah, I feel pretty good. I feel pretty good. The only thing is my eyesight is bad. But your hearing is pretty good, though. Yeah, the hair, I wear a hearing aid in there. Yeah, but you walk straight and... Yeah, I'm in pretty good shape. I'll be 102 in December the 18th now. And you go downtown every day? Yeah. Well, I tell you, I work down there to the... You work? Yeah, I work at that Lloyd's hearing aid. You know that there, hearing aid place on Kishawake, 128 Kishawake? Used to be a streetcar barn. Oh, you worked there? Yeah, but I worked two days a week. I wanted to quit. I was there 18 years. First fellow started with Lloyd Kling. His father and mother run the restaurant on 7th Street, Kling's Restaurant, you know. And then Lloyd, he got into the hearing aid business. And so I knew Lloyd pretty well, see. So he asked me one time if I would take and help him a little bit, testing aids. He said, I get new aids, and I don't have time to give him a good test. He said, would you test? So he showed me, told me what to do. And I said, yes, I'll help you. So he'd give me five or six aids, and I'd take them home. And then I'd sit nights and test the aids. I'd have a radio going. I'd have an A, have that going, kind of soft, and I'd keep it changing. It's fine, if they're working okay, see. Well, then I'd take and make a report on every one. This one was pretty good for medium tone, and that one pretty good for low tone, and that got to be high tone, like that, you know. So he told me, he said, see, you're doing pretty good. He says, I'm going to put you on a payroll. No, I said, I'll help you just for the payroll. Yeah, I'll put you on. So he put me on the payroll, just a little pay. And I think it was a dollar a day or whatever it was he gave me to start with. So I helped Lloyd then, and then finally as the time went on, Lloyd built up pretty good business. I helped him to get started good. Then Pound Green took it. He bought the place out. He got it today, see. So when he took over, then I started working for him, see. So that's a... He's a pretty good fellow, that Marvin Pound Green. So they keep you busy then? You're testing hearing aids? Huh? So they keep you busy? Yeah. I tell you, when I got to be 100 years old, I told Marvin Pound Green, I'd like to quit, I said, I've been working long enough now. And he says, no, don't quit. He says, don't quit. He says, you come, or you can come. When you feel like you want to come down, you come down. I'll always be a hard job for you. I used to finally get there, I'd go down one day a week. Then here, about a couple of months ago, he said, say, we're getting pretty busy again. He says, would you come two days a week? And I said, yes, I'll come down. I come down at 8 o'clock and go home at noon every day. I come down two days a week. I come down and a caravan picks me up, takes me down, and I work there till 12 o'clock, from 8 o'clock to 12. Then the caravan picks me up and takes me home. So I come down, I'm up in two days. So how do you start your day now? You drink, you eat breakfast in the morning. What time do you go up in the morning? I'm all alone, I've been all alone for 18 years, my wife is gone. I tell you, I don't eat much breakfast. I have cereal, cornflake, you know, cornflake and milk. And a cup of coffee, maybe have a donut or cookie or something like that. That's my breakfast. Then at noon, I had now for a couple of years, I've been getting what they call a meal on wheels. They deliver it every day, five days a week, meal on wheels. They come every day about 11.30, quarter to 12. They come and deliver it at the door, wrap on the door, and then they bring the dinner. Well, all it is is lunch that they get, you know. Does it taste good? Yeah, it cost me $3.20 a meal. But all I get is a lunch. I didn't order a big meal. Of course, today, if I had to put a good meal, today they delivered about 11.30. They had chicken, a piece of chicken, mashed potatoes, and peas in the hoe, a piece of bread, and a half pint of milk, and I had all I wanted to eat. All I want for the rest of the day now. But how about for dinner tonight? Do you eat a heavy meal tonight or a light meal? Well, if night comes, I like to sit and watch TV about 5 o'clock for an hour and a half. From 5 to 6.30, I shut it off. I never had it in the daytime. I never had TV in the day. Never had TV after 6.30 at night. I shut them off. I get the news, and that's all I care for. So you follow along with the news then. But what do you eat then before you go to bed? Well, maybe I'll take and get a couple of cookies and take a little glass of milk. No coffee in the morning, I mean between the meals then? No, no coffee in the meal. I like coffee in the morning, you know. And you don't drink and you don't smoke? No. No snuff? I don't drink, I don't smoke, I don't use tobacco, anything. Never done that? No. Well, I used to when I was younger, I used to smoke. I never smoked very much. I used to, once in a while, I never bought cigarettes. I never liked cigarettes. But I'd have a pipe, and maybe I'd take a pipe and smoke a pipe. That's all I'd have. How about politics now? Were you a Republican or a Democrat? Well, I'll tell you, I have always worked, when the presidential election, I have always voted Republican ticket. Always voted Republican ticket. But when they have local elections, like in the city, then I always pick the best man, I think. The person. I voted for the Democrat, if he's a better man than the Republican, I'll vote the Democrat. I watch that pretty close when it comes to the local elections. They got a lot of good men in the Democrats. And when I come to vote, I'll vote the Democrat ticket for more fellows in the city election. But when it comes to the Republicans...