 This is cassette two, side one, continuation with Mr. and Mrs. William Johnson, Rockford, Illinois. Cassette two, side one. So it was not hard for you to explain to your new husband, you know, going together. I mean, it was not going to be all Swedish. He had to go away from his mother. Were you both Americanized? You were born here, and you were born in Sweden, of course, but they didn't make you... No, I was American. Actually, I don't think she realized I was as Swedish as I was until I brought her home, took her home to my folks. Because you had no trouble, the language now was English. No, yeah, sure. Only the parents were different. Your parents... No accent whatsoever. No, because she was growing up here. But your parents not coming over to your parents or vice versa. It was different. Could your mother-in-law, for instance, talk to your mother? That was the hardest part, with my folks conversing. Did they have tea in the afternoon, your mother-in-law and your mother? No, no, because her folks live in Harvard, you know. It was too far away. Too far away. So actually, my folks and Loveta's folks, the only time they ever got together is when they were at our house. At special events. At special events, yeah, whether it was a kid's christening or whatever. I mean, that was the main... But like your father, now, his interest was in farming. Did he relate to your father, for instance, about his interest in farming? They talked a lot about farming together. I think my dad and Loveta's dad got along, a lot easier than the mothers did. Because they had a common interest. That's right. But the women folks, no. The traditions and the customs were completely different. Grandma Johnson didn't understand too much English. No. They just pretty much sat and looked at each other. That's right. So there was no talk about preparing Swedish food? No, no, no. There was nothing there. And we worked, the family's traditions worked well together, because with the Swedish, Christmas Eve is the time of celebration. Harvard, my family, being English, it was Christmas Day. So we were always able to spend Christmas Eve with those parents, and Christmas Day with my parents and create no problems whatsoever, because they were still hanging on to the traditions in both families. And I was pleased about that. Because there was never a choice. Well, are we going to be at your house or with my family for Christmas Eve? So there was no discussion. There was never any discussion, because there was no need to. How about Christmas morning? You went to Jylutaland in the Covenant Church. Did you have the same thing in the Covenant Church? No, no. No Jylutaland. No, the only thing that would be a conflict there is they normally have a Christmas Eve service, and we never do attend that. Even now we don't attend the Christmas Eve service at that church, because we're over at my brother's house celebrating, you know, our... Oh, here. Oh, here. I mean, it's either one or the other now. Still is. So that one we miss. So that part of the Christmas service we miss out on. And I still try to make the Jylutaland down at Salvation Army. That's about the only place they have it now. We go to church someplace on Christmas Eve. Oh, yeah. After our service board, and especially as the children got older and couldn't go. We didn't have to worry about getting them home to bed. And then we... Because there were several Covenant churches, the smaller Covenant churches that had a Christmas... Eleven o'clock. Eleven o'clock. Yeah. So then we... So we... Our party was all over by then, you know, and we just went from there to church and then home. And it really was a nice way to celebrate Christmas. But the rest of the church, our service has always been with Santa Cruz. So it's... But this year now they're going to change it. They might have it at four o'clock, so I think maybe we'll make Christmas Eve at our church this year. Early bird. Yeah. How about Thanksgiving? Was that observed as much in your family as in your district? Well, that one we have to do a hop along, you know, take turns. If we entertained, we always had both families. By the time we were married, his brother was already married, and there was other families there too, you know. So we haven't been too concerned about Thanksgiving. It's never been that big a... Big enough yet. No, it's not that big an event. We... Our family's always celebrated Thanksgiving. We've always had a house full, but it hasn't always been the same group, you know. Sometimes my brother would come over with his family, and then other times he'd have Thanksgiving, and either we'd go over there, or if we didn't go over there, we'd go to Harvard, and then part of the other relation is go to my brother's, and we'd kind of balance things out, but it's never been a problem. It just kind of works out. And you had two daughters? Mm-hmm. Two daughters. And they were also very close, not to your mother. Yes. They must be your limbs so close then. Right, and it was handy to them, and my mother... So they were closer to your family than to your mother. Yeah. How did they work out? I mean, so they were brought up without knowing that they were Swedish-Green. Yeah, and they still don't really know. Yeah, they still don't know they're Swedish. Are they interested more in the Swedish background or the English? How do they... Neither. Neither? Well, maybe more Swedish. I think so, yeah. Yeah, a little more Swedish. I guess because of... Do they have any grandparents, you think? No, I think I've kind of been the one to instigate that. Yeah. Well, Grandma Johnson worshiped the girls. Yeah, spoiled and rotten. And Bill's brother had two grandchildren also, or two children. So they had four grandchildren, and none of them could ever do anything wrong. Oh, I see. So they stuck up for them. No, yeah. No, you bet. But with my parents, they were from the old school, that's all I want to tell you about. They were strict? Yeah. Very strict. At the table, for instance? Yeah. Table manners. And everything like that. Noise, no noise. Children were to be seen and not heard. And Lovetta's mother had a lot of antiques, and you could tell that she was uncomfortable when the kids were around her antiques. They could sense them when they visited. I believe that. They were very uncomfortable. Yeah, and my mother was just the other way around. She could care less. She just wanted the kids to have a good time. She went overboard until we were in the precinct. Yeah. That just was her way. It was just her way. Were they strict religious, your parents? Well, yes, in a way they were, but they were never, I should say, critical. I mean, we never had liquor in the house. We could never play cards in the house. And they didn't like the idea even of us going to the theater. But when I went, they never objected to it, but they didn't encourage it, you know. And I never went to the senior prom or anything like that, you know, because that... Well, there was no prom. Oh, no, that was no good, no. Couldn't do that. And so, and consequently, I think I rebelled to a certain extent, because I'm not a... I don't go out and get drunk on Friday night or Saturday night or anything like that. Yeah, but I'll have a glass of wine or something, you know, when I eat. And if I get thirsty after a hard day's work in it, I'll have a glass of beer if I want it, but I don't sit and drink beer all day, you know. So, I mean, I'm not one way or the other, but... And we like to dance. We belong to a dance club. Me, both of us like to dance, and I don't think it's hard as a bit. In fact, I think it's good exercise, you know, so... So, your family, they were for... not against dancing, then, or... Oh, no, my folks danced. How about liquor? Were they against it? No, they were never in a ranch. No, yeah. Just never, ever had liquor around. But cards were all right. Cards, we did play cards. My grandparents were dead against cards. You just never had cards around, then. So, on Sunday, you didn't do anything, as far as my grandparents were concerned. Their food was always fixed on Saturday, and nothing was done on Sunday, except for the church, and other days, you know, after work, you know. Of course, I think I'll have to interject here, one thing, though, because here, maybe 10 years ago, there was a couple of girls that wanted... needed a place to stay, so they talked to our preacher, you know, about... if he knew of anybody that... and we happen to have a room here at the... you know, so we did let... we let these girls have that room for a couple of months, you know. But the preacher told the girls, you know, she says, if you stay with Bill and Lovato, you're really going to have to be careful, because they're real strict people, she... he says, are even stricter than I am. That preacher told them that, so I think I got a bang out of that, because I really don't consider myself that way. But, you know, we were just... used common sense, I guess, you know, and... so I don't believe in being hard-line about anything. Well, they probably have established most of the religious denominations, like... I couldn't tell you, I couldn't tell you. Years ago, of course, 50 years ago, it's a different story. Yeah, oh yeah, oh yeah. So your brother, now, he married a Baptist? Yeah, but that was... was that Swedish Baptist? Was she of Swedish background? She was, yeah, she was Swedish. But, of course, she wasn't... neither one of her parents were born in Sweden, but they were of Swedish background. Ladeen was her name, so they were Swedish background. And... but I don't know how they got involved in the Baptist church, but they're... Well, George Doris was baptized in the Baptist church. Yeah, that's right, so that was... Her parents were active in the Baptist church, and, you know, I was in the Baptist church, so that's where the guys went. So, politically speaking, your family, were they Republicans, or...? Well, I think my mother was neutral, and my dad was a Democrat, and I'm a full-fledged Democrat, right down the line. Oh, and have you ever been anything else? You always had that... Well, at first... oh, I don't vote to strict ticket, you know, but I'm a registered Democrat, and, of course, I'm... I believe more in the... I think in the Democratic philosophy than I do in the Republican one, because maybe I don't have the right idea on it, neither, but then... and now the latest folks are strong Republicans. Oh, I see. Does they go with the farmers, you think, to be in the... I think probably that's part of it. Always been Republicans? Oh, yes. Oh, boy. The strange part of it is, is they have five children, and we're all Democrats. Well, they're coming from South Dakota, and there are not too many Republicans out there. Weren't there farmers, or what do you call it, the Progressive Party? I don't know what they call it. But, you know, most of your Swedish people in Rockford were your Republican, you know, real... It's very hard, because most of them were workers. Yeah, but they were... Was there a time with the management, you think, to have a... I think so. I think so. But now, of course, when I worked at Amersol's, I was just a worker, but then when I left there and went in a job shop, I joined a union. And, of course, one of the reasons I joined the union was I made about 40 cents an hour more just by making that change. And after I got involved, and you had to belong to the union in order... because the job... the contract, it was a closed contract, you know. Most of the job shops in Rockford at that time that hired pattern makers, you had to be a union man in order to get a job. There was a different union than the machinists. Oh, yeah. We had our own, local. And once I got involved in it, I became one of the officers in the union. And it was in 1930... No, 46. 46. Yeah. 1936 is when they... when the union got involved in Rockford. That was a big... that was a real knockdown and drag out... The beginning then. By the beginning of your pattern maker union in Rockford in 36. Before that, the union was very weak then. There was none. No. No, the guys weren't running the streetcars, were making more money than the pattern makers were. Yeah. So that was one of the reasons why they organized. So do you think there was a... the worker was afraid then to talk to the union in the shop because he could be fired? Could be fired. They'd hang you then. I mean, if you talked to the union, you were a communist. That was... You were outside the union. Oh boy. It still is kind of shaky. And all the Swedes, they went along with that philosophy. Well, all... They didn't talk anything about it. Yeah, I think a lot of them did, and especially in your furniture factories, because they were really... I mean, they were afraid of being organized. Yeah, lose the job, sure. But how did the union start? Did you think it was the other groups like the Italians or the Polish, Irish? No. In fact, the fellow that started the one in Rockford was the Swede. For the pattern union? For the pattern makers, and he went on to become... Well, he was from Chicago, and he came into Rockford. Do you remember his name? Leonard Hallstrom. And he became the president of the national for after the... He was not related to... not related to Hallstrom. No, no. He was from Chicago, so he wasn't related to anybody here in Rockford. And he still was living down in Florida, I guess. His wife died in there not too long ago, but he was a real nice guy, good friend of mine. And he was the one that, back in 36, organized the pattern ship and pattern maker. So when I got in in 46, that was 10 years down the line. It was pretty well accepted, you know. But it took a long time to... Oh, yeah. It took a long time. And by that time, we had a good contract, and we were making good wages, and the people that weren't union were... Left behind. Prejudiced because they figured that we were making more money than we were supposed to because we were organized, you know. So that was part of the deal. Most of my friends were Republican. They didn't like the idea that... not that only that I was a Democrat, but that I was a union man, and I was one of the officers in the unions. I had a pretty rough time of it. Do you think that a Republican or... being a Republican and also belong to a union, was there two different... You bet it was. You bet it was. You couldn't go together. Well, there was some that did it, but it... It was odd. It was odd, you bet. Had the rule, if you were a union man, you were a Democrat. But I know a lot of pattern makers that were Republicans, and they were in the union. Do you think there's any truth in the saying that, like, Irish now, they were Catholic and Democrat? Yeah, yeah. It was... That was the reason why many Swedes also chose to be a Republican. I think so. Well, and same with the Italians. They were Catholics, too, you know. And many Democrats. And consequently, many Democrats. In fact, Rockford, back in the 40s, the very few Democrats that weren't in the Fifth Ward, and your Fifth Ward was completely Italian at that time. Now, Zeke Georgie, I don't know if you know Zeke. He's our representative from this area. He was the alderman from the Fifth Ward. And just down in South... South Rockford. South Rockford. Good friend of mine, by the way. And we've had lots of nice... We've had lots of nice... We've had lots of nice... We've had lots of nice... We've had lots of nice... We've had lots of nice... We've had lots of nice... We've had lots of nice... We've had lots of nice... times together. But now, of course, he's way up in politics, so... And still, of course, still a good Democrat. But this neighborhood here, when we moved in here, there were seven Democrats in the whole precinct. Seven? Yeah, counting Levada and I. So there was five besides us. Boy, that's awful. Yeah. So I was precinct committeeman then, because I thought that was... Well, that was just about the time Kennedy became president. You know, that was in the 60s, and about a little before that, maybe. But I got involved in politics a little bit, too. So... And the only reason I did is because we were so outnumbered. You became an alderman then? No, just a precinct committeeman. Then I gave it up, because I... The kids got to getting... I needed a little more time with the kids and my church work, and I just didn't have time for it. And then definitely, when I started my own business, I was tied up, so... But when you started out with the... Or joined the union in 1946, you said? Mm-hmm. At that time, as you probably heard, the 1920s and 30s, there were Swedish socialists active here. Yeah. Halsner was one. Yeah. He was elected a government mayor on the ticket. Sure. Were they... Were the Democrats stamped as socialists at that time? Oh, yes. Oh, yeah. Sure. Not as Democrats. If you were a Democrat, you were a socialist. Socialist. Yeah. It was the same thing. Yeah. And sometimes they'd even call you a communist. So there was no... No. There was... No in-between. No in-between. No. Oh, yeah. But they don't call them that today, though. Well, it all depends on where you're at. There are still people that think, if you're a Democrat, that gotta watch you. Because now you would think they would be... I thought they died out, the Swedish socialists, for instance. Well, there was Americans. Yeah. Yeah. But they more or less died out during the 30s. Yeah, they died out, but then there's... Depression. They still... I don't know. I just don't know how to explain it, but there's still people that... Of course, you know, there was a time that if you were a registered Democrat and worked for some of your bigger companies here in town, that you had chances. That was enough to lose your job. That was back in the 40s and the 50s. Well, they just found a reason to fire you. They didn't tell you that, but... It was before 1936, though, wasn't it? No, no, no, no. This was in the 40s and the 50s. 42? Oh, yes. Oh, yes. And I can remember once, and I can't verify it, but back in the 30s, most of your big companies had a mutual agreement that they wouldn't hire people from each other, like National Lock, or Matsons, and Sunstrands, and these people. If you worked for them and they laid you off for their stuff and you weren't looking for a job, and they found out you were laid off from one of those other companies, you just didn't get a job. And they went to Rome first. Oh, yes. And then you lose that, right? Yeah. Of course, that you can't prove, but that... No, but it is the way it worked. The way it worked, yeah. It's a case of action speaking louder than words. That's right. Because they won't go along. So that... But you came after the Swedes... When you came into the workforce, being a Swede at that time didn't mean anything. No, no. In fact, I think it helped to be a pattern maker and being a Swede, because most people kind of figured if you were a Swede, you knew how to... you were either a furniture man or a machinist. I mean, that was part of your natural heritage, I guess. So being a Swede didn't hurt any. Of course, I had a boss that was a Catholic, and he was, from down south, a Southern Catholic, and a, well, a hell of a boss. I mean, a good guy to work for. But he sure liked the rise of Swedes. But he did it in a good way. In fact, we had a colored truck driver that worked at the shop with us. His name was John Stunt, Bob Johnston. Nice fella, about my age. And one time the boss was giving me a hard time, you know, and Bob came up to him, you know, and he took... The boss had turned to Bob and said, Bob, he says, isn't that right, these Swedes, they're no good, are they? And Bob, and, and, what I'm saying about Bill here is right, isn't it? No, Bob says, I don't know about that. And he said, how come you're sticking up for a Swede? And Bob tore it to him, he says, well, he says, you know what, Swedes, we had to stick together. Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha. So it was all in fun, really. Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha. And there were not too many colored people here in Rockford and Fortimore. Oh, no, no, no, no. You heard the story about that, didn't you? The story used to go around about why there weren't so many colored people in Rockford, well, they say that, you know, the Swedes are in Rockford and the colored people were up in Beloit because when the Swedes and the colored people all got here and they were going to choose who had, who got what, Beloit got first choice. Is that true, though? No, no, that was just a joke. So Rockford had to take second choice and they got the Swedes. Not true, huh? No, I don't think it was true. But it was not easy, though, for an Italian or an Irish to be a foreman in one of those factories, you know, that was owned by P.A. Peterson and... No, I don't think, but now this is going back a little further, but from what I heard, from what I heard, that the Swedes, they really stuck together, especially in the furniture factories, yeah, and if they were to be a foreman, they would have to be a foreman. And if there was Irish in there, there were some Irish and there were some Italians that worked in them, but if they did, they were good craftsmen, so they wouldn't hold their jobs, but... But you never worked in a... Furniture factory, no. So something happened, you know, in the 30s, they went with the same machinery as they had in 1910, 1915, 1920, and 1930. Right. They never changed over to more modern things. So that was part of it, but the other part of it was, too, your union movement, I think, came in. Whatever they claimed, but is that true, you think? I think it's true in this respect. I don't think it's true that the unions tried to organize the furniture factories, that I don't believe. Because they were afraid at that time to organize. That's true, but there were other, like your carpenters and your... Plumbers. Plumbers, and some of your other trades... They were organized. Organized, and when they organized, they got better wages. So consequently, some of your better furniture factory mechanics changed professions. They lost some work... They lost some of their good people to the other trades, because they could make more money if working for Twin Disc or Universal Join or Sunstrands or someplace like that, that because of being organized, their wages were higher. So consequently, if you were getting 30 cents an hour in a furniture factory, and you could become a... Go over and work in one of the other factories for 60 cents an hour, even if you were a furniture man, you made the change. And I think a lot of them did that. There's now one of the pattern makers that I know, Cracker Jack, furniture man, and he became a pattern maker because he made more money as a pattern maker, he could have furnished for them. It was almost the same skills, you know, the only difference was reading blueprints and knowing your founder theory, but as far as the machinery and everything, it was the same. So that was part of the problem, I think. So at the time when the furniture went all over Rockford, the Swedish owners, they sold out to Jewish people, isn't that true? That's the way I understand it. And then they moved south. Then they moved south, uh-huh. But the Swedes didn't move south. No, no, no, no, they moved, they just moved their operations south and they tried to, oh, what should I say? Make it like you do automobiles, you know. Production. Yeah, put your furniture in more of a production deal than you would, than they did here. So they were unable, in other words, to raise the timely wage from, for instance, 40 cents an hour to 60. Were they able to increase the value, I mean, the price of the furniture? I don't know. Why were they afraid to pay a little bit more? I don't know. I have no idea. Because I was pretty young then. I never did get on the, and I think, too, a lot of your, uh, a lot of your craftsmen, older craftsmen about that time, kind of faded out of the picture, too, and the younger ones, and the younger ones, instead of going into a furniture factory to work, preferred to do something else because the wages were better in some other areas. That's why, actually, I was thinking of becoming, working in one of the furniture factories, but I had a chance to go to Ingersoll's and work in the pattern shop and I knew it was a furniture man, so I'd work in the furniture factory, and I think a lot of people thought that back in the 30s. And when the furniture left, then the machine shops took over. That's right. Machine tool industry was strong in Rockford then. And they were more modernized. How did they, how did they happen? Or were they more up to date? I? With the machinery. Probably were more up to date. I think they probably had some engineers and some idea men there, and they probably had some engineers and some idea men there that had some good ideas that they could push, just like Woodward Governor and Sunstrange and all that. People that were running them were ahead of time and they were smart and they had something that they could sell and people could make a living, better living doing that than they could doing something else, so that's what happened. And then the wool production came right after. Oh, that helped. Yeah, that helped too because there was... There was more metal used than wool. Sure. So they made the small shop owners bigger. That's right. Like Aldine and M. Rockford. That's right. Uh-huh, well, Ingersoll and Sunstrange and, well, Woodward Governor really blossomed out there, you know, so. So there was a time then that put that line on the priorities, so to speak. And then the unions started to come in, I mean, more and more. Right. But they, most of the shops now in Rockford, they had their own union. Well, I don't think they really, I don't think the unions in Rockford ever became real strong. They are not like UAW. No, no, there are some of your smaller shops that were. Georgetown's is one union. UAW, that's UAW though. Oh, that's UAW, that's correct. That's the only one. Yeah, but now like, well, I mean, you know, Robert Coleman's never had one, and that's a big shop. And of course, Woodward Governor would never, you know, there are particular. But they were able to keep the workers happy and with a pretty good pension plan and. Well, that's the interesting part of it is, you know, a lot of them that worked there figured that they didn't have to belong to the union because the companies took care of them, and that's one way to look at it. And the other way to look at it is the companies took care of them so that the union wouldn't come in. So it all depends on how you want to look at it, I guess. But weren't the workers really up to snuff to figure out? They always say they take care of you, but. Yeah, well. You wouldn't know that until 20 years ahead. I know that, but they have. I mean, so it's been a good time. So they have paid all pensions and everything? Oh, yeah. No. Have you? No. In fact, I think one of the best places in Rockford to work is Woodward Governor Company because they really take care of their people. Better than Sunstone's? About the same, probably. Of the two, probably. Probably, I would say probably. I would say if I had a choice, going back to the 40s, and if I was going to work for Sunstrands or if I was going to work for Woodward Governor Company, knowing what I know now, I think I'd go to Woodward Governor Company if I could do the work. What kind of production line are they in? Oh, they make governors for diesel engines and all that stuff, and they do an awful lot of work for airplanes, governors for airplanes. And just what the governors do on the airplanes, I don't know, but I know that... So they are specialized then? Yeah, very specialized. And then they make the governors for dams and power plants and all kinds of diesel, all locomotives and all that. So they've got companies all over the world now. So they are a good company. How did you get into it? Was it your own interest or somebody told you to... Well, really I had a course of it in high school, and it just seemed that I was comfortable with it, and I did real well with it in high school. And the instructor there in high school gave me the recommendation for intersolves after I graduated. He was the one that submitted my name as one that should continue the trade, so that's how intersolves got a hold of me through the school. Of course, I was handy with the machinery and with the tools there, and I probably was maybe, oh, I would say maybe about twice again as many projects ahead of the next one down the line, you know, as far as making things then. How old were you when you started in vocational? Well, I went all through high school. I took two years of pattern in school. I was 18 years old. Was I 19 when I started intersolve then? Of your school, did they stay with the line too? No, one other one is all. And he became a partner with me in my business when we, Johnny Kenberg, and he was a Swede too as far as I go. He was born in Sweden, but his parents were second generation, I guess. So the factory is not like intersolve. They recruited young people then from high school. That's right. They knew exactly what they would want to get. That's right. That was right. Did they check you out before you were hired or? I had an apprentice course. Oh, sure. I had an apprentice course in intersolve, of course, but that was the only check. I didn't have any tests or anything, but I guess now if you went to Woodward Governor Company, they had a big test you had to fill out and everything, but I never did get involved in that. Intersolve had nothing like that, just an interview and I was hired. And you stayed with them then for how many years? Well, I think to 47, and then I was in the service for two years out of that 47. So I was there about five years. And then you started your own? No, then I went to a job shop. Then I went to Rupp's. And I worked for Rupp's for 25 years. Who? Rupp Pattern Company. That was a job shop in town. So I stayed there. I was there until, oh, in the 60s, some 65, I think it was, from 47 to 65. So I was there quite a while. But then you started your own. Then I started. Three of us got together and started our own. And you were very active though in the union movement. Well, I was vice president for a while and I was also the secretary of the apprenticeship committee. And that's where I did most of my work because I was real active in the training of our pattern makers. And I was involved with the Foundry Society too as far as training is concerned, pattern making training. But that would be the only extent. What was your line of pressing the company on? I mean, more pay, of course, but also vacation, hospitalization? Whatever, yeah. Security on the work? No, no security. There was never, never. The only way you were secure on your work is if you did your job. They could hire and fire whoever they wanted to whenever they wanted to. There was no reason for it. If you didn't make money for them, you were out. And that was the way we wanted it. The only thing was they give you so much vacation pay and your hourly rate. And that was it. And the hourly rate was always the minimum, you know, hourly rate. Because I don't think I worked for the rate. Since 52, I guess, I went in and asked the boss for a raise over the rate. You couldn't have any piece workers over your job because you'd have to be careful, huh? Yeah, but say if the rate was $1.20 an hour or whatever it was, I always negotiated for another quarter over the rate. So I'd be getting maybe $1.45 an hour. But did you question the management if they could make a living, I mean, at the same time? I mean, everybody wants a good pay, of course. No, we never – we figured that was our department. Our department was trying to make a living on our side. And in those days, that's the way it seemed to work out the best. And there were no strikes, though. Oh, yeah, there was a couple of strikes. But the only one I was involved in was in 52, wasn't it? We were out for – yeah, we were out for eight weeks, and it was kind of a dumb strike because we were only out for a nickel. We were only a nickel apart. But out of the time that we were on strike, I was only out of work for – I was only out of work for, what, four days, five days? Four days. Four days. I went into Chicago and got a job in Chicago, and their rate was higher than ours. So actually, I was making more money in there, but I was away from home, you know, like you are now. I was away from home from Monday to Friday. But there was about 20 of us in there, and we were all in the same hotel, so there was three of us that roomed together in a hotel room, and, you know, we ate together and worked close together. So we went back and forth those six or eight weeks that we were in Chicago. So that was really a nice education, if nothing else, and a different kind of work, but interesting. So it was easy at that time to pick up your – Yeah, right, right. And the strike was settled, and everybody was – nobody – there was no hard feelings off of that one, like there was in the one in 36. And – It was a long, bitter one. The 36 was a bad one, yeah, and I wasn't involved in that one. So you were too young to realize what was going on. All I did was know what was – when the older guys talked about it. But there was hard feelings about that strike even up into the 60s, and that one was in 36, you know. How did your philosophy change now when you got your own company? Not really, not really. Were you still for union demands, you could see their point? Oh, I always felt that if all the pattern makers that worked in Rockford had a minimum wage so the wages wasn't the thing that we were concerned about, then it was up to us to hire the right men and get the right kind of work so we made a living on it. And we shouldn't make – we shouldn't try to make a living by paying our people less. We should do it by getting the job out for them and doing a better job. And I think that's the way it normally works. But there is one thing, though, that management is against the worker, is that a lot of parasites comes in with the union, you know, they protect each other. Yeah, well, see that – Isn't that a bad one, though? Yeah, that would be a bad one. That was why ours was that we never had that, you know. It was a struggle. Yeah, if you couldn't make money for the company, they fired you. You couldn't do anything about it. And we encouraged that. We encouraged that. We didn't want people. Why should I work on a bench and have to carry somebody else? But some of you used them to – Well, no, but ours was a real skilled job. We didn't do the same thing, you know, day in and day out. So consequently our jobs were a little different. We – every day we did something different and we had to create something all the time and there was nobody just doing a routine job, so that part of it I think is – It was specialized. Yeah, it was different. It was big. So you had your Rock Valley pen and it works, then how many did you employ? Well, we didn't – there was three of us that owned the place and there were times when we hired one other person. So you didn't have to worry about unions, then? Not really, no. When we hired him, we paid him whatever the rate was. But we never had that much business, so we needed any more people. Because we kind of got in when the machine tool industry was kind of hitting the skids and that was our bread and butter. That was one of the reasons I got out of it and what I did, is because it was – the people that we were doing business with were the ones that were leaving, you know. So we had a chance to sell out, so that's what we did. You continued on for about how many years? Ten? Oh, about ten years. Ten years. And then you got interested in the Swedish Culture Society. That's about right. And you learned more about your ancestors in Sweden. Yeah, right. And you went back – you went to Sweden in 1975? Yeah, just for a little bit. Then 1981 is when I spent three weeks there. And you had your wife with you then? Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. She was with me. Did you also go to England or was that too remote for you to find out anything? No. Never did. We were in England last year for just a little bit. Never did. We were in England last year for just a few days, but nothing – not to go looking up relatives. That was just a visit. It was too far? Well, we had other plans, so we never even tried it. Your parents, though, Miss Johnson, did they have any connection with England? My mother has never been over there. She has two sisters that have made the trip to England, but she never had, and she still has relatives in England. But, you know, of her dad's family, they're all gone now, and – I mean, it's the immediate family. And there are no cousins or second cousins on here? Yeah, there are several second cousins. But there's no correspondence or contact? No. With my grandmother's family, I don't know. In Sioux Falls, South Dakota, there are still, like, second cousins. Just about, you know. Still on the farming? No. They're in the city. In the city. But I don't know how they do. Never gotten – my mother has never been interested in ancestry, and so I just never had any of that. But you have a connection, though, with Sweden? No, I do. In Sioux City, in Hoos Corner. No, I didn't. I have some. Maria Berry, you said is on there? Maria Berry. That was the name of the homestead. So you saw the house then where your mother was? Oh, yes. Oh, yes. And also your fathers? Well, I saw where the house used to be. It's a gas station now. So the family sold out the land there, and part of it's a – some – Shell, was it? Gulf. Gulf. So it's a Gulf gas station. So did you meet anybody of your relation that remembered your parents? Oh, sure. Oh, sure. Of course, all my cousins, and then I have an aunt still alive, and I had a nice visit with her, and still correspond with all of them now. But now for years, I would say for 20 years or more, I had no connection at all with Sweden. From the time I left home, got married until the 70s, no connection at all with Sweden until we made that one connection in 71, and then since then, now I think we correspond with at least 25 people over there. You know, Christmas time, May, Spring. So when your mother had the contact with Sweden, she talked about a lot of people, but you couldn't connect them with your – No, I couldn't connect with people or the places. So what did you see now in Sweden when you visited? A lot of relatives. Was it something that your mother or parents had talked about? Oh, yeah. A lot of things, yeah. A lot of discussion. Uh-huh. And there was one place that they talked about, Grinstorp is the name of it. My dad had – before they came to this country, they left this corner, and my dad had a store in Grinstorp, which is a town, for just a year or two before they decided to come to this country. And my cousin, Carl Nordheden, worked in a big – what would you call it? A farm. Farm, plantation or whatever it is, in Sandhjem by the name of Grinstorp. So there was a farm by the name of Grinstorp, and there was a city by the name of Grinstorp that my dad had a store in. And during the time I was growing up, they both talked about different things that happened in Grinstorp, see? And I could never understand how it could be connected, because I had it just as one place, until I went over there, and then I realized that there was two different places that they were talking about. And then some of it made sense, but before that, it just never did make sense to me, because I just – it's just too complicated. But now that I've seen it, I can understand what they were talking about. And the language was no problem, or else you'd be there a few days. No. Back to you. They all talked Swedish, so we didn't have to worry about English, or he didn't. Yeah. You know, so I was just a – Was you able to understand? I took the back seat. No, she couldn't understand, and it was boring for her, really. But the language they spoke, now, was it different than your parents, or was it very similar as you could describe? Yeah, it was different, but it was – They talked faster? Faster, and I think their dialogue is a little different. But, of course, most Swedes, when I try to talk Swedish, say that I have a real small-earning dialect, but I think I got that on 7th Street here more than I did anywhere else, you know. 7th Street was there. But I think I have one favorite story that I like to tell about when I was in Sweden, and that was the last day we were there. I'd been speaking Swedish now for three weeks, you know, and listening to it. And Loveda and myself and my cousin, which only spoke Swedish, were shopping in one of the stores in Stockholm, and I'd talk to English to Loveda, and then I'd talk Swedish to my cousin, I'd talk Swedish to the girl on the counter there, you know. And after we'd made our purchases, Loveda and I walked away, and then this lady that was working in the store turned to my cousin and said, she says, boy, she says, that sweet shirt can speak good English, talking to me. She's got a good mark. Yeah. That made his day. And when my cousin, you know, told me about that, she got a big bang out of that. Bang out of the first time we went over to Sweden, I visited a couple of my dad's brothers. Now, remember, these people haven't seen each other since 1924, neither my dad or this... So your dad went with you then to Sweden? No, no, no, no. They never returned to Sweden? You never did. Never did. But when my dad would ever want to get our attention, or if he wanted to make a... get a point across, you know, when he was talking and arguing about things, you know, and if I didn't pay attention to him, you know, his old hand would go up like this, you know. This is what he'd do, see? You know, just like this. And if he wanted you to do something, or if he wanted to make a point, this is what he'd do. That's the way he'd do it, you know, to get your attention. And I was talking to his youngest brother, and we were talking about politics. And we were talking about American politics, you know, and I was giving him a hard time, you know, and he got a little bit hot under there, and you should have seen that hand come up, just like my dad. It was identical. Identical. And Loveda looked at me, and I looked at her, and we just burst out laughing. Yeah, but your politics, not being a Democrat, did they clash with his view? Was he a malaritan, or...? No, I think I was just teasing him. I don't remember what it was about, but I was just teasing him, and I don't know if it was... I was just making fun of him. I was just making fun of him. Yeah, I think that's what it was. And you defended Nixon's a little bit then, like being an American. Well, I was defending the Americans, yeah, and boy, this old hand just came up like that. Not to threaten me, you know, to make a point, you know, to make a point, just like my dad did when he'd make a point. And it was just part of... And you know you were related. That's right. How about you, now raising your two daughters? Did you go a middle way then, half English or half Swedish, or what? Well, I think we raised them pretty... I don't think we were strict with them, not too strict with them. Table prayers, for instance. Did you have that in your family? Table prayers? Oh, yes, oh, yes. We still do that. The Swedish one? No, English, English, yeah. And a lot of times it's never anything vocal, but we just have a silent prayer, and we... Nothing, you know, nothing routine or nothing memorized or anything. It's just a... Bow your head. You just bow your head for a moment of prayer, and you don't have to say anything, and then that's it, you know. And if you want to say something, or Lubeida normally says a few words, and that's it, so... But the girls knew their dad was boss. Yeah. You never raised your voice? I mean, no, no, because I don't go for that. There's two things that I never did, and one thing is that Lubeida and I never argued in front of the kids. If we had a disagreement, when the kids were in bed, or when they were gone, or something like that, we sat down and we discussed what we didn't believe was right, or whatever it was, and we come to an understanding between us. And if the kids did something wrong, I never criticized them in front of company, or when we were out. After we got home, I said, look, when such and such happened, you know, watch that. And whenever, especially when the kids were young, and they were getting a little unruly, I just did that. And when I did that, they said, uh-oh, when we get home, we're going to talk, they're going to get talking to us. So things kind of calmed down. So I really never had any verbal, we never yelled at each other or anything, but if the kids were fighting about something, or if they had a doll that they were picking apart, or something like that, I'd do that, and they kind of quieted down, and things got okay. And there was no problem. HURST-MILLER So they knew that there was a lot of... SATTERWHITE No, they knew that I knew that something was going on that wasn't supposed to, and when we got home, we'd talk about it. That's the ballad of the monitor. HURST-MILLER Yes.