 In the old days, people would come over from Europe and settle in different places, but they published a newspaper in their own language. The Belgians had their paper, the Swedes would have their paper, and especially the churches printed papers in their language. I know the Free Church published a Norwegian paper, and they also published a Swedish paper. But I was on the board of publications when Reverend Olsen, the president, came into a meeting one day, and he said, we're going to have to stop this Norwegian paper because we're losing money on it. I said to him, listen here, you're preaching from the platform that these old timers are the heritage of the Free Church. And I say, you're going around to them and asking them to put the church in their will. I said, if you are asking them to put the church in their wills, the least you can do is publish a newspaper for them. So he said, okay. So they passed that year. The next year he said, I don't care what Brother Strombich says, we got to stop this newspaper. It's costing too much. I told the board, I said, okay, I'm not going to say a word. But I said, remember one thing, it was the Swedes that wanted to keep it going, and it was the Norwegians that wanted to kill it. And they killed it. You had to talk real. One thing about the Swedes was that they talked so you understood what they were talking about. They made things plain. That's why they call them bullheaded. This expression of dumb Swedes, they came from the idea of the first generation. They weren't able to speak. You were meant different. You spoke a different language and you were running around. Just to be different. We were different. So that around town when you talked to people, they'd say, he's a Yankee. That meant he was an American. Then you were accepted. Yeah, then you were running things. But if you were a dumb Swede, they didn't listen much to you. But that was okay with me. So I always figured this way, if a dumb Swede can earn money, when you got the money, they listened to the money. But you were an individualistic person. Most of the other people, both Belgians and Swedes, they went with the crowd. Yeah. And they didn't try to break out. Yeah. I know when I went to school, I never went to any class parties. I went to school and then I'd come straight home and did whatever work I was supposed to do. But I didn't attend any class parties. This year is the 60th anniversary of when I graduated from high school. And I haven't been to one class meeting yet because I can't mix with them. I never mixed with them when I was a kid. So I don't feel at home with them. You've been many left. But in regarding the shirt store, you had no problem to mix or tell your opinion at meetings and so on? I didn't talk. Well, of course you did. You had more meetings than you- Oh, that was different. You talked to the Norwegians. Oh, that was different. That was in business because if I know that I'm going to speak in the meeting before, I get so nervous I can't talk. But if something comes up at the meeting that is wrong, I can tell them off right there. I know one time when I was on the publication board, we went to a yearly meeting convention and things weren't going too good for our publications. I got the floor and I said, I thought that the preachers believed in reading the Bible, which was sort of sarcastic. I said, we're not selling many Bibles at headquarters. He said, if your teachers are reading the Bible, why don't you send for them? I said, the church believes in teaching young people when they're little kids so you can get them straight first. I said, I don't think the church believes that anymore because they don't send for any material from headquarters. When I got through, the editor of the Beacon- Mel Arson? No, the other one before him. The fellow that wrote that book. Thompson? Thompson. He was on publications. He said that the sales at headquarters went up to $10,000 in a month because I raked them over the coals. You tell me they're going to close the bookstore? Oh yeah, one time, one meeting, they were losing money at the bookstore at headquarters so they were going to close it. So we met at the yearly convention and the trustee board made the recommendation that they close the bookstore. I got the floor right away and made the motion to reject the trustee board's recommendation. Olson, the president, stood up and he said, Strombich, he said, this is the trustee's recommendation. I come back and I said, yes, but remember, the trustees are working for us. They're not telling us what to do. We're telling them what to do because we elect them. I said, I made a motion to reject their recommendation and it's been seconded and they rejected it. Another time they made a recommendation at the board, at the yearly conference, that the conference should okay the professors at the school in Chicago. So I got the floor right away. I was against that because that meant that the school board was not doing their job. What should the conference do with that? So I asked the question, I said, you 500 people here, how many of you know what they're teaching at the school? How many know it? All the courses they're teaching. There wasn't one over there that knew it. I said, all right, now how many of you here know who the professors are? Do you know the professors up there? There was one guy that said he did, but he happened to be a professor himself. I said, all right, now you got a motion here that says that this conference is to okay the professors. I said, you don't even know who they are. You don't even know who they are, let alone know if they're any good. I make a motion, you reject that. And they threw that one out. But isn't it the truth though that most of the members, they don't really go into nitty-gritty stuff. No, they don't. They believe everything is supposed to be all right. Yeah. But shouldn't they be thankful that they have a guy like Brother Strombach to open up the worms? I'm a troublemaker. Yeah, but that's needed though. I mean, otherwise everything is going to go their way. That's right. Because of course it's a good Christian feeling to trust people. But still, you have to have a little mistrust if something is right there. Well, I've got another philosophy that few people don't believe in. And my own granddaughter married a young fella. He's going to a seminary out in California. I told Stephen, you should take a business course. He's going to the seminary. I said, listen, you want to be a preacher, that's all right. But the first thing every preacher should take is no business. Because when you talk to somebody, you've got to get so that you can talk to them so they understand you. And when you don't know business, and they're a businessman, how can they follow you? Now, you take Ben Haden on the TV. He's a nationally known preacher. He used to run a newspaper. Now, you take Stuart Briscoe up in Milwaukee, up there at a good church. He used to be a banker. All these good preachers, they were businessmen before they became preachers. So they know how to talk so you understand them. You've got to talk the language what you're talking about. And if you can't talk the language that your listener understands, there's no use preaching. You just stand up there and preach. And one hour goes by and they close the meeting. Everybody shakes hands and they go home. When they get home, 90% of those people can't even tell what the preacher talked about. They said they were blessed, but they were sleeping. Blessed in the sleep. Yeah. No, but if I go back to one of the earlier questions I had when you were young and listening to Gustav Johnson, every young person, you know, has some ideas. What did you have in the recommendation to Gustav Johnson and all the pastors? Well, I only heard him about three, four times, but Gustav was all right, except he was wrong in a lot of things. Gustav, I heard him in Rockford one day when he was preaching that Mussolini over in Italy was the Antichrist. Well, after he preached that sermon, they took Mussolini and hung him up by his heels and filled him full of machine gun bullets. And he wasn't any more Antichrist than I was. So could you have made any changes? No, they were all right because in the old days, people went to listen to Gustav and other fellows because he moved around. He got them excited. He was – he believed in – he was – what do you call it? The blazing gun in the – Yeah, he was too. So he used to wake people up. He did wake them up too. A lot of people were hurt. He did them a lot of good, but he did a lot of bad too. I suppose that's one of the hardest professions to be a teacher – a preacher and also a teacher of course. Yeah, yeah. Well, nowadays – Too many good ones, like we call it. Nowadays, preachers have to learn to counsel people too and tell them what to do. Now about 20 years ago, when Will Norton was president of Trinity College, I told Will, you should have a course up there on business. Just take insurance and teach insurance for two weeks and the last day of that two weeks have a free church band in there to teach that class. Then you take two years to talk about money and banking. You take two years about – talk about accounting. No, two months – two weeks. Two weeks. So that at the end of a year, you've gone through everything that pertains to business. Only two weeks at a time. They are not experts, but they learn how to talk about it so they know what you're talking about when you talk about it. When I told Carlson, Don Carlson, a missionary in China, he told me, that's right, you should have. Because he said, we had a lot of trouble in China because the missionaries down there didn't know too much about business so they could get into trouble. It took a lot of time to straighten them out, out of things that if they had had that course in school about what business is about, they wouldn't have had that trouble. I know when I sent my oldest son to Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, to learn printing, in that school the first thing he took was a course that was just a certain length of time about all the different kinds of printing so that when he got through he knew a little bit about it, but not too much. But he knew if he liked it or not. And they should do the same way with preachers about business. If we go back now, let's say 75 years, the pastor was a very important figure in the immigration, helping people with their worldly needs. You had to make a job, get them a house, they helped them. How about today? No. At that time, for instance, in the 1930s, the pastor went on in his salary to the minimum bare level of surviving and the people respected him. He was one of them. But today, no. Yeah, but I believe— But the pastors in a different world, no. Now they're talking about pensions, security of being on the job. Do they deliver the same kind of religious service? Well, in the free church in the old days, the only thing that they required in the free church in the old days was the preacher had to know about the Bible, that's all. He didn't go and counsel people. He didn't get them jobs. He didn't do anything like that. Yeah, but years ago, don't you think they helped them out? Not so much the individual members in the church. I mean about 7,500 years ago, they helped them to write contracts, to buy houses and land and everything. I don't know. Not in the— I see records of that. Yeah, I know that's because that's more in the more modernistic churches. But in the free church, that wasn't so. It wasn't so. No, I know. I remember in the old days that my mother would take kids downtown and get them clothes. I've purchased a lot of clothes for people. In fact, we've got a small group together here now. We haven't met for a while, but we're going to. We got Alzina, Mary Ray, and some of the others there. It's a small group of people for the purpose of helping people. So when we went to the bank, we got a checking account. We called it—what was it? Matthew 25? Matthew 2540 or something. Yeah, and the preachers, the cashiers, making out the checkbook, he said, Matthew who? No, are you Mr. Matthew— So you go by Nelson's Bible? Yeah. By the old message? Well, I say this much myself, that if it's written in the Bible, it's true. And it's the easiest way to follow. And people that say that belongs to the Old Testament, I don't care what it belongs to. Everything that's in that book is I believe in. And they forget that. And you have followed that during your life? You give towards the need. In business and— Well, you got to do that. Because if you tell the truth all the time, you don't need to worry about remembering. Because if you tell the truth, you'll tell it over again. People that don't tell the truth got an awful job to remember what they said the first time. They have their many versions. Yeah. And there's always someone that remembers what they said. Yeah. And some people make up stuff. I think you better go out to the— Depression, we had to get different ideas. Wait a minute, have you started? I was working up at Amarok. So I don't know just exactly how I thought of this, but we had some steel up there that was scrap. I formed this out of that. And I made a die out of wood so that when I pressed, I laid a piece of steel on there and pressed it down, it formed that half circle. Then I took a wire and I made a V shape in a piece of wood and put a V down and formed this piece. This was part of a hinge that we sold up there. So I took this little piece of hinge, I formed this hand holder out. And the idea was that when you have a hat and it should rain, it rains, you take it into the closet and you lay it on the shelf. It collects the dust on the shelf on the under part of the hat that you put in. So this thing you screw into the side of the wall. When you're not using it, you press these two together and have it flat against the wall. When you want to use it, you pull this thing out this way, you open these two things up, and you hang your hat on there. You hang your hat on this and it hangs. Since that holds the hat from the inside, you hang your hat on it so it does not get dirty underneath. And it's a good idea. But my brother and Stan Mommy weren't working, so I made up a bunch of these and I took them down here and they would go in the old Ford and go out to some small town all around and go from house to house and sell them. Did your mother make sandwiches for them? Yeah. And we put different prices on it. Sometimes we charged a quarter each. Sometimes we sold three, four, fifty cents. We found out that it wasn't always the cheapest price that sold the most. It was a quarter each that sold the most. You could sell more at a quarter each than you could sell it for a dime each. Oh, isn't that something? Because people, I don't know what's wrong with people. So you changed your attitude and I mean… We just experimented. How old were you? Monroe. I graduated from high school. I must have been about 23 or 24. 22? Yeah. Oh, I thought you were younger. No. It's very interesting. It shows that you were not sitting down. That's what they have to do now because if I was a young fellow today and I was out of work, well, this was an idea. There are many more ideas that can be invented. That's just that I got an idea now I can't talk about. It's a secret. That's a secret. That's right. I think it's a good one. That's the one I'm going to start a factory on. A lot of people say sometimes, you know, there's no use to think about inventing new things because most of the things are already invented. Listen, remember one thing. There's 240 million people in this country. They all got to have shoes. They all got to have clothes. They all got to eat. They all got to live in houses. And if you can make something that people can use, you can sell it. I laid in bed the other, about six months ago, and I was listening to the radio from the University of Iowa, and they said that the production of apples had gone down 25 percent in a certain area. And in that second, right there, I invented something. So you are always in the active mind. So I've got to make a sample of it first, and then I've got to build a factory. But it will sell. I know it will sell. Because how will it sell? If I was a guy, I would buy it. If I buy it, why won't somebody else buy it? And all I have to do is we have to set up an organization. I've got to get the drawings made up. I've got to make a sample. I've got to figure out the cost of how much it will cost. I think it will cost about between $1,300 and $1,500, and you've got to have a sales feel for it. And I've got that all thought out. And I know a lot of people think I'm crazy, that I can't start a factory, but if I can just have ten years to live, I can make it go. That's what you call optimism, isn't it? That's okay. Same. Altsina wants you to come over to her house. She's been over. He's been over there. No, I mean talk about it. She's got stuff she can talk about. And she asked me the day before yesterday that when you came here, well, she should be here right now. Leonard, oh, is she coming over here? It's a quarter after one. She should be here at one. They weren't printing presses in those days, so he had to hire that young fella to write out some work for him, some legal papers. And when the kid got through, he said, what do I owe you? The kid said, the only thing you have to tell me is how did you get to be the richest man in Babylon? And that's where the story starts. But the thumbnail story is, you take your money that you get, I don't care how little it is, if you get paid ten dollars, you set aside one dollar. You take one-tenth of anything you get and set it to one side. And then you save that until you get enough to invest in something. And I've started a lot of young fellas to save money. You take the fellow Krebs over at Estradon, he's the one I buy it. His secretary does it. She asked me one day when I come in there, she says, Strumbeck, I've got to ask you a question. I've been using your idea of saving ten percent every time I get any money. She said it works great. But she says, I've got to buy a rug in the house. And she says, the only way I can do it is to take my paycheck next time. And I can't put ten percent in there. I said, don't you break it. I said, if you do that once, you've killed it. I said, you just forget about the rug until you can afford it. You save ten percent every time you get paid for anything. And after a while you invest it. In time, if you're good, the book goes ahead that tells you that you should invest in the right stuff. And then when you get enough money ahead of time so you can live on the interest, then you can start spending money. Because you've got the money. It's more money coming in all the time. But until you got enough money saved up so you can pay cash for everything, don't buy stuff on time. Pay cash. And if you can't pay cash, don't buy it. There was a writer in the Chicago Tribune I used to read. He's not there anymore. But he says that the difference between immigrants from Europe and Yankees over here is that the American, he wants something. He wants a car. He wants a refrigerator. He wants something. So he goes down to the store and he buys it. He pays interest and carrying charge on it. The one that comes in from Europe, the old timer, he wants something, but he hasn't got the money to pay for it. So he doesn't buy it. And when he gets through, he gets more for his money because he gets interest on his money while he's saving it. The American, when he buys something, he pays interest out. So if he buys a car, he pays about twice what it's worth.