 At one time out at the factory out at Strombeck's, they were so bad in debt that there was a company in Chicago, there were people in Chicago that wanted to take it over and sell it out. In fact, when I went into the bank in Chicago, I come in to pay one bill for seventy, I think it was seventy-two thousand dollars. They didn't want to take the money. Well, I laid the money down there and told them I was paying it up. The reason was that this company run an auction house and they thought Strombeck was broke and they could come out here and have an auction. I didn't want that, so I paid them off. I had to, otherwise I didn't have to pay any of the big creditors off. You know that when, the saying is that if you owe a guy a dollar, he's got you. But if you owe him ten thousand dollars, no you got him if he owes you a dollar. But if he owes you ten thousand dollars and he can't pay it, he's got you. You just gotta wait. So there are always scalpers like they ought? There is all the time. When a company owes too much money, then the trouble is the first one in thinks he can get it and the others can't get it. The Moline National Bank really saved me because they told the creditors that you play ball with this guy or we're going to take the factory ourselves. Mr. Wondry played ball with me. In fact, he was on the board for two years. He didn't want to be on the board because a banker doesn't want people to know he's on a bankrupt board. But Wondry played ball with me because he knew of my connections in Rockford. The company in Rockford was bigger than what the bank was. So there's got to be a leverage you have in your back pocket to put on the table. You got to play leverage all the time. That's the only way you can do it. Because the man that took over Strombach, Mr. Storr, S-T-U-H-R, before he bought it, the vice president of First National had me come down to the bank and talk with him. They wanted to know what the place was worth. So I came down there. Storr was there. I told the fellow, he's about 50 years old. I said, Mr. Storr, don't you buy it at all until you get everything set. I said, you're going to run a factory. Think what you need. You need orders. All right, I said, you go, you find out who our biggest customers are. You go and talk to them and get their promise to get an order before you even buy it. I said, you get – and Chicago Cuddlery owns it and they want to sell it because they're losing money. But I said, they've got five machines in Alwakonda, Illinois that they can make their own handles. So if you buy it from them before you get an order from them, they'll never give you an order. So I said, you go up and talk to Mr. Gengelhoff and tell him you got to have an order for two years for $200,000 worth. I said, he won't like it, but you tell him you won't buy the factory without that order. And he has to have the handles so he'll give you the order. You can go down to other big companies and get their orders. So you got all the orders on the books. Then you get your old-time employees together and see if you buy it, if they will work with you. And I said, then after you've got the orders and the workers, then you borrow the money. And you're going to make handles first, so don't buy any more material than you have orders for. When you make handles, you get the order for the handles first, and then you go and buy the lumber afterward. So you don't have a lumberyard full of lumber you don't have orders for. But is it easy to sell the product ahead of time like that? Because the buyer would be afraid to lose out if they buy too much of one product? No. If you know how to sell, they got to have confidence in you. Can they press the price on you then if you sell a long time? No, no. But you don't have anything to worry about if you know what you're doing. The cost of lumber is about 20 percent of the handle cost. So anyway, you can raise the price on Chicago Cutlery because he wants to sell that factory. He's losing money on it. And the only way he can sell it is to give you an order for two years in advance. And that way you got them. But then Bloomberg said to me, he said, Vern, what's the place worth? Because I had been thinking of buying it myself. And I said, what are you buying it for? For machinery or to run? If you're buying a factory to run, then you've got all your electric wiring in, all your suction system in, all your gas lines in. I said, you can use it. And it's worth about $200,000 more than if it's just for machinery. Because when you take the machines out, the wiring isn't worth the dime. So then he said, how much would you pay for it? I told him I'd pay about between $400,000 and $500,000. He turned to the store and the store said, what do you offer? He said, $425,000. So the guy was in the ballpark all right. But there's one mistake that guy's made. He said he's going to make handles the first year. I go along with that. He can make it if he stays with handles. But he says the second year, I'm going to go into toys. No way can he do that. If he goes into toys like that, he's going to lose his shirt. There's a toy fair in New York City in February. You make your toys first, and you sell them afterward. You don't know if you can sell them. Well, if you made up a lot of toys and you can't sell them, you've lost your shirt. When you make handles, when you sell handles, you don't make them until you get the order. And then you get the order for the handles, then you buy the lumber, and then you make the handles and deliver them. But with toys, it's a very tricky business. You've got about five billion. That's with a B, market. But you've got some awful big competitors. And when you're a little guy, the cost of advertising, the cost of salesmen, and all the cost of distribution is so high that you've got to sell an awful lot to break even. And you don't know if you're going to make it. And the foreign competition comes in, how much? Oh, yeah. And Taiwan. Taiwan, Hong Kong. The labor cost is only— That's one-tenth of here. But they're getting closer over there now. Years ago, they used to be able to hire women over there for ten cents an hour. But they're getting higher now, so that the Japanese now are finding out that they've had to raise their labor costs so that Taiwan now is getting harder to do business than Japanese. You better clip that thing. Go to college. It's instructors. And if you've got the guys that are bona fide instructors and are good teachers, then you've got the most important thing. Then the next most important thing is the books, because books are tools for the instructor. The third most important thing is the building. Most people think the building is the most important. Forget that. The building doesn't teach, and the building doesn't help a teacher. So we put the building in number three, and Trinity has gone real good. Now, I talked to Neil Snyder the day before yesterday. I told him that the times now are much more dangerous than they were. I don't know if he's interested. I was looking for the other book. I have noticed over the years, you know, when not only the free church, or maybe not the free church, but the Lutherans and the Covenants and the Baptists, they have their teachers telling the new theological students, the future pastors, what to learn and what to teach the parishes out in the country. And they seem to be 20 years ahead of the parishioners. Well, I told Neil— You know, for the old timers to follow the new pastors' viewpoint. How does that affect now? Well, I told Neil Snyder—he's the president of Trinity—I said that now is the most dangerous part, because when you hire a professor, you tend to get a man with a lot of letters after his name. I said, I don't care if he's got anything after his name, just so he teaches the right thing. You just told him yesterday. You told him that? Oh, yeah. Just yesterday, he called—this guy called. Another thing with schools, people think it's wonderful if you put up a lot of buildings. That can be the worst thing you ever did, because one thing—you've made it necessary to raise money every year after that to keep heating that building, to keep electric lights in it, and upkeep of that building. They have to have buildings. Yeah, but you can have too many. You can ruin a school by having too many. The trouble up at Trinity Western, usually college starts and they think that you have to have a—what's that where you play games? Gymnasium. Gymnasium. Gymnasium, yeah. That's the last thing in a college. You've got a college to teach people. I don't care about football. I'm not putting up something for somebody to play football in. But don't you think the churches have followed the college's tradition of having a strong athletic program? Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. He believes in that too, sure. They're making good use of that building up there. Yeah, they are. Uh-huh, yeah. So that— But it shouldn't be the most important. Then it's a danger of— I mean, it's close by in there. We put up a science building, the first thing. That was a real good science building. There was a suite there, by the way, in Detroit. They gave all the equipment for that. Oh, yeah. What was his name again? I met him up in Florida last year. Now are you going to put—oh, yeah. I think I'll start talking about education. My grandparents and their fathers and mothers were not fully educated. In fact, one of my grandfathers could not even write. But when they came over to this country, they believed in education. And my dad and my uncle were graduated from the University of Illinois and the Northwestern University. But they had to work their way through school, earn their own way through. My father waited on tables. And when he graduated from the University of Illinois, he married my mother at that time. And she was a seamstress. But she had to loan him $60 to get him through school. And then after that, he sent—my dad sent my brother and myself to the university. And my children are all graduates of university, all four of them. Not of university, but of colleges. And their kids are going to school. All four kids of my oldest daughter, Sharon, are going to Wheaton College. And my brother's kids have gone through colleges. So that my grandchildren, all of my grandchildren, when they get older, will all be sent through university or colleges. The Swedes in the old days had a good brain. They were smart people. And they were self-educated. But when they came over here, they believed in school. And because of their good, natural common sense, they were able to become very well-educated. And they were able to do something after they got through school. Like my uncle started a factory. My dad worked for Rudin-Vandeworten Company. And he was a mechanical engineer. And he has invented several wood-turning machines that are just as good today as any in the country. So the Swedes have a record of good thinking. And that's what you have to start with. And then coupled with good thinking, they believe in working hard. You can't get ahead unless you work. But you have to have more than just work. Because you find some people that can work very hard, but they can't get ahead. But if you work hard, and you've got a good mind, and you know how to reason things out, you're going to get ahead. You find in the city of Rockford, the heads of many factories up there are Swedes. And they have been very successful in building up factories. Like your family now, Mr. Strombach, you are also credited with like a red thread of religious backbone. Yeah. What does that come from? Your father is credited for starting actually the free evangelical church. No, no, that's wrong. My dad was, when my grandfather came over, my dad's father, he was not a Christian. But after he was saved, he joined the covenant church. And they were in trouble in those days financially. But he helped them get out of, he went around and raised money for them. He was the one that was called Gustav? Yes. The one that was called Gustav of Lutheran church though? Yes, but they went into the covenant. And when they went into the covenant, it was in such a way that the preacher was sort of sneaky about it. He got members that wanted to join the covenant to go over to Galesburg at a convention so that when they came back from Galesburg, the Moline church had become the covenant church. And there was about 20 or 30 other members that didn't like this. So they left the church and started an independent church. And they had one of the parts of the constitution of the church was that you cannot vote on anything except that it is announced to the people for two Sundays that you're going to talk about it. So you can't have any sneak tricks on doing things. Everybody has to know what they're going to vote on ahead of time. And then my grandfather was one of the original, he was a pioneer of the Moline free church. And my dad was brought up in that, so he was a president of the Young People's Society and he was chairman of the church for many years. And my dad was the first moderator of the national conference of the Moline free church, national free church. So that after he was, no he wasn't the first moderator, but he was the first moderator that was not a preacher. They had moderators before, but they were all preachers. And Mr. Aldino in Rockford, he was chairman up there for many years. But not to show the advantage of being in religious work. My dad was chairman of the Young People's Society of Moline church. Mr. Aldino was chairman of the society of the Rockford free church. And they met at Illinois state conventions. So they got to meet each other. When Aldine started the Aldine Manufacturing Company in Rockford that became the, that was built up, he needed money at the beginning. And he told the rest of the felons that he would go to Moline. He knew Strombeck in Moline. And he was a close friend of my father's. The rest of the board in Rockford was afraid. They thought, they had heard of my uncle who owned the Strombeck Manufacturing Company. But Fred was very bullheaded. And they said in Rockford, we don't want the felon. But G.W. Aldine said, this George Strombeck, it's absolutely different. He's a friend of mine. So G.W. came down here and got my dad to invest money in his factory in Rockford. And that was one of the most fortunate things for our family here because the Aldine Manufacturing Company became the American Cabinet Hardware Company. And that grew so they joined, they merged with the Stanley Works. But the government would not allow them to stay with the Stanley Works because it made a monopoly of hardware. The American Cabinet Company made 27 percent of all the hardware in the United States. So Stanley Works had to sell the factory to the Anchor Hocking Corporation. And the Anchor Hocking Corporation owned them now. Do you think your father-in-law investing in that company, that was the personal knowledge of Aldine, of course, and also being in the same church. They believed in each other. Yes, they did. Aldine knew my dad was an engineer. It's a funny thing the way things go around. When my dad went to university, he had absolutely no money. He had to work himself through. When he went out to Strombach-Becker, he was a head engineer out there, and Strombach-Becker made money. Now he earned some money there and he joined another company, the Harrington Seabird Corporation. And that company was successful. They sold out to the Gamewell Corporation, and the Gamewell Corporation merged with the—had several mergers, and they made money on each one of them. And when the Aldine Company in Rockford needed money, that's where my dad got the money, because when they sold out to Gamewell Company, they sold out for equal amount of stock and an equal amount of cash. And he took that money and took it to Rockford and gave it to Aldine. And Aldine's made good, so that when Strombach-Becker had difficult times down here and was on the verge of going broke, I was able, myself, to take money that we had earned at the American Cabinet Hardware in Rockford and invest back in Strombach-Becker and brought Strombach-Becker out of their troubles before I sold that factory. So it goes to show that Strombach-Becker earned the money first, and then my dad took that money to the Harrison-Seabird Corporation, and he made enough money on that thing that just the amount of money that American Cabinet needed in Rockford, he took it from that company to Rockford. That company was a success. So when Strombach-Becker needed money back here, he was able to take—I was able to take part of that money back here to help Strombach-Becker out. So it went all the way, complete circle all the way around. The factory that started making the money, Strombach-Becker was the one that needed it in the end. Q. But that took some guts, though, on your behalf. I mean, you could have taken that money and put it in the bank and— A. Well, my cousin told me at the time I was out there to help him, he said there were only two fellas that thought that Strombach-Becker could be brought out of it. He said that—and he said I was the only one that would be willing to put money into it. But the funny thing about it was that at the time it happened, I had no thought of losing. I knew it was going to go because I knew in my mind exactly what I was doing. At the nighttime I couldn't sleep for three months because I thought of all the bills that they had. And it just looked like we were paying out money for everything. But in the daytime I would go out to the company and I walked around the buildings and everything looked fine. One day I asked Mr. Partridge, the treasurer, I said, Partridge, how much have we got this insured for? He said a million and a half. When he told me that, I knew that I was on safe ground. The trouble had been that Fred, my uncle, was so conservative that he had depreciation on everything out there as much as he could. He depreciated the machinery in the buildings so that on the statements there was a low figure like our machinery was worth over a million dollars. But they were on the books for about 200,000 so that when I went to the bank to borrow money they wouldn't give me what I wanted. So I took pictures of all the machines in the plant. I had my son get a Polaroid camera and I took about 187 machines and took pictures of them. And then I glued the pictures each on a page in the book. And then I wrote down what those machines were worth new, what they were worth on the used machinery market, and how much we could get for them if we sold them secondhand. And then I put down how much we had them on the books. There was an example. We had three molding machines out there. They were worth brand new, about $50,000 each. They were on the books. The used machinery price was about $15,000 each. They were on the books for $2,000 for all three of them. And there I had $45,000 worth of machines that were on the books for $2,000. So I had to go down and tell the banks just what I was doing. The one thing at that time was that the banks had complete confidence of what I was doing. I had to personally guarantee the loans. I would go to bank, to the Moline Bank or to the Orion Bank one time, and I borrowed 50,000. But every time I borrowed money, I had to guarantee the loan myself because the bankers had confidence in me, but they were very good. We owed, when I went out there first, we owed $560,000, and we only had $300 in the bank. So it looked bad, but I've got a philosophy that if you have a lot of trouble, I don't care what trouble is. It can be personal, it can be business or anything. The trouble is so big that you think you got it, it will lick you. What you have to do is what I say, fragment it. You take that big problem and you divide it into a bunch of little problems, and you lick one little problem at a time. And if you keep that up, you lick the big problem without worrying about it. In the factory, when I took over the factory, we owed all that money. I called the creditors together, and I first paid off all the creditors of $100 and less, paid them off and got rid of them because all they could do was complain. So we paid them off. And then we took the big creditors, and I got them together at the LeClaire Hotel, and they made a committee. And Strombach-Becker paid them off $2,000 a month until we had them cleared off. We paid just as what we could pay. When I first came out to Strombach-Becker, they were broke, and my cousin was. He was nervous. He was scared. Well, I set up a telephone between my office and the shop, and I told Fred, you can't spend more than $10 without asking me for it first. And the way we had to lick the problem was, in any business, you got to have a good cash flow. So when I took the company over, I told Fred, we're going to sell the—we're going to finish this stuff that's closest to the shipping room and collect the bills—ship it and collect the bills and pay it off on the bills—no, collect the money and pay it off on the bills so that when I want anything for the shop— QC 3, side 2. A If I had sent the money to the creditors, they would have just taken the money from the factory, and they wouldn't have shipped anything. But as long as I ordered the stuff myself and had it shipped to the factory, they had to ship it because I paid for it myself. They weren't dealing with the factory. And we worked ourselves from being next thing to broke to a good credit rating. One reason that the banks worked with me was that a lot of our creditors were customers of the bank, and if we had gone broke, their customers would have lost money. Because when the bank worked with me to bring the company back out of it, their customers received all their money, so nobody lost a penny out there. QF How about the bankers now? You were in a position to have leverage on them because you were known as a good name and good security, I suppose. A Yes, well, what I did, to begin with, I went down to the bank and met the two presidents, and I told them the history of the company, how it started in a little shed by the river, and it grew up so that all through the years at the high year, they had sales of two and a half million dollars. And I showed them how it worked, and I said I believed that I could bring it back if they would work with me. So they said, okay, you go ahead and take over. And as long as I signed my name to the paper, the banks went along with me. And they had, if I hadn't had the help of the banks, we would never have made it. But QF It took some doing. A You got to gamble, and you got to know what you're doing. QF But it was a high risk, though. You had A Oh, yeah, it's all risk. All of life is a risk. I remember one time when I had to deal with the, well, I better not say this. Q Yeah, but what I asked you before was that, you had many sleepless nights. A About three months of it. Q Yeah, if you had not put the money in the bank, would you already risk the, have been gaining interest and no worries? A Oh, yeah. Q You slept three months without the A Yeah, but how I licked that was, when I refinanced the company, when I took over, I changed the financial structure of the company to 40,000 shares. And every stockholder of the company before my time got the right to buy one share of stock for one dollar for each share of stock he had. It ended up out of the 40,000 shares. I took over 20,000 shares at one dollar each, and I turned that over to the bank in Rockford so that when I sold the company for 13 dollars a share, afterward, the bank in Rockford made a good profit out of it. They paid one dollar and got 13, but the bank in Rockford helped me a lot. There were two times they loaned me 100,000 dollars each time, and it got to where the trust officer at the bank up there was getting kind of worried because he was helping out a – it could be called collusion because I've got a trust fund up there, and he got the money then he lent me from the trust fund. And he came down and he said, we're going to have to do something. But when I sold the company, I paid him back the 200,000 dollars that he had plus 13 dollars a share on 20,000 shares. And when he walked into the bank after we sold the company, he got 400,000 dollars, and it helped him look good up there. In all big business, there is no such thing as a thank you when you did this right as one. No. Did they ever say at the bank, you are a good customer, you did this very well, Mr. Strombeck, did they say that? Not in this particular case, but I remember another time when I was in business with a man and I had helped him. He had gone bankrupt and I had helped him out. So we started this business and I put the money up. He went to the uptown bank and borrowed 20,000 dollars on what they called accounts receivable. One time I was in the bank up there and we talked about the accounts receivable. I told the banker, I said that paper ain't worth the papers written on. I said all those accounts have been paid. The man that had charge of it, he kept it in the business. He didn't pay you off the way he should have. But I said don't worry about it. I paid off that 20,000 dollars to the uptown bank. After that my son Richard was in business and he needed money. He would need say 5,000 dollars. He went up to the uptown bank and he came back to me and said I can't understand it. He said when I tell the guy up there that I need 5,000 he said that's okay. You don't need any assets. He said what do you do? I said I read the fine type and I pay the bills. And he knows I'll pay the bills. So then he's got confidence in whatever I do. Because a crooked guy can't borrow money, but if he's not honest he won't pay it. And the banker is more interested in if you're honest or not. So that's just the way how that works. Anyway, it was interesting to read your father's, George Strombeck's account of what he was through in Colorado and different things. He is very particular when he writes about grandma's wooden large market basket that was 12 by 20 by 9 and a black walnut table and the Indian peace pipe. He said all those things. I think that's a walnut. Isn't that the walnut table? This is the one? Yeah. And that little trunk out there, that's over 100 years old. And that little trunk out there was the one that my grandfather carried around the country when he got laid off by the railroad company back in 1980, I think it was. He went on to Monmouth? Yeah, went to Monmouth. Then he came to Moline to marry my grandmother. But your father, he was very particular, and especially in his writing, writing on details. He wanted everything. He did that with everything he did. He was so particular that when he went and bought gasoline for his car, he kept track in a little book how much the taxes were on the gasoline that he bought so that he could report that on his income tax. He kept – I got out in the garage after he died. I had a big pile of papers that were receipts from stuff he'd bought. Now I'm going to have to go through that, but it'll end up I got to throw it away because he was too careful. He kept track of everything so small that you can't imagine. Why do you think – well, this was a business reason also, but saving all those things, he – Well, that's what he did all the time. It was his life. Yeah. He was particular. If he did anything, he kept a record of it. I found a – where my grandfather was in the free church in the old days, and they call it a free church, but in the old days, they had to pay dues sort of. And in that book, he had a list of all the members and how much they should give a month. And they gave five cents a month, ten cents a month, and if a fellow had a lot of money, he gave a quarter a month. But they kept track of everything right down to the last cent because in those days, they didn't have high wages, very low wages. They paid the women out at Strombach Becker, I think it was 17 and a half cents an hour. But you could get money, something for your money in those days. The first time I came into Rockford from the university in 1930, I went to Svea Restaurant up on Broadway and ate there, and I had supper there. I paid for meat and potatoes and vegetables, bread and butter and coffee, I paid 25 cents. And if I wanted dessert, a piece of pie, I paid five cents extra. But when I went from the university to American Cabinet Hardware, I got paid 30 cents an hour after I was a graduate from the university, and I was a truck driver up there. Did your dad, for instance, know the same kind of neatness and particularly knowing all kinds of accounts receivable and expenses and so forth? Or were you a little bit more loose? Well, I'm always loose. I'll give fellas money, and I don't even write it down. So you don't worry about the details? I don't worry about nothing. I want to know that the principle is right. I know there was a preacher out at Faith Church. The second preacher they had was a young fella, and after he'd been there a few years, he wanted to leave town. So I told him, okay. He owed $2,500, so I gave him the $2,500. He never signed anything for it, and I made an agreement that he should pay $50 a month back. So I started a savings account at Uptown Bank, and he put in the first $50. That's the last $50 I ever heard from him. That was so long ago that the interest on that $50 is worth more than $50 now, just the interest. But I never kept any track of him at all. And there was another preacher in those days. I ran a print shop, and this man was called the old Sky Pilot. He was a Baptist preacher from Geneseo, and he came in, and I talked to him, and I said, I've been down in Mexico, and people down in Mexico think that American tourists, if you can learn English, you're going to make money. So I said, what you want to do is take the Gospel of John and print it up with English and Spanish side by side, and use that Gospel of John for an English lesson. Well, he went for that. He said, make up a million of them. I said, wait a minute, you can't pay for a million. But I printed $100,000 for him, and he took them down there, and you just use it in missionary work because what all Sailhammer wanted, Reverend Sailhammer wanted was that the people should read the Bible. Well, when we used the Gospel of John for an English lesson, we put on the front and the back cover that it was learn English with ease, and the Mexicans down there, when the Catholic priest told them to throw it away, don't read it, they wouldn't do it because they loved money more than they loved the Catholic Church, so they kept it. It started a riot in one city down there because they tried to break it up. But with Sailhammer, he owes me also about $2,500 for, I'd say that's been 35 years ago. I'll never see that, but I don't care because now we started a store down there, so we've been in business at the bookstore for over 52 years. So this has been your real main business store? That's my own down there. So the rest of what you are telling now, there's been more like a sideline to... Well, that's stuff that I did on the side, and we started the bookstore, but I lose money on the bookstore every year because we give discounts down there, and we're running the bookstore as a mission station. When they talk about Caracas, Venezuela, or Hong Kong, China, or Africa, if you talk about a bookstore over there, people give money to that bookstore for a mission. But I'm running this store in Moline. We've got just a big bunch of heathens over here in Moline, and we do as much missionary work here as they do in Africa. So this is primarily a religious bookstore then? Yes, it is a religious bookstore. And you also publish and print? At the first time we published and we printed both. When the missionaries had been over in their mission field, South America or China, Africa, they spent 30 years of their life over there. I figured that I can write a... if they will write a history of what they did, I can print that for them because I really owe it to them. So we've published about 10 or 12 books of different missionaries of what they did on the mission field. And we've lost money on every one of those books. But that doesn't make any difference. So the religious side of it, is it only the free church, all denominations? No, the free church. Free church? Yeah. Free church. Because what my policy is, that when I give money, it's not the amount of money I give, but the purpose for which it's used. If you should always give to a need, they always preach to you, tithe, you should always tithe. I do not believe in tithing for me because the big thing is that I give to help a need. Now when you tithe, it gets so that you just write a check, turn it in, and you get so you're almost like the Catholic Church. They do the same thing. But when Trinity Western College started up in Canada, I've never been on any board for that school, but I've done all I could to help them. In 1964, I think it was, I gave them a library building. The first I did up there was when I went up there, they were on a farm and they had a little lawnmower, hand lawnmower, and they had a hundred acres of land that they could never, that they could never cut. So I come back to Moline and there was a fella down in Moline called Sage. He sold lawnmowers. So I got Wilbur Sage to send up a lawnmower that are used on golf courses where you can ride it. So I bought that from Sage and then it shipped up to the school. I remember that was one of the first things. Then the next thing was they built a science building and when they took up money for the science building, a lot of people promised money for it, but they never delivered. They didn't pay it off when they needed it. So we got the idea. I took $20,000 and gave Reverend Hanson and he said, well, I'm going to tell them up here that we're going to have a banquet and I'm going to tell them that you folks that give money, I've got a guy in the States that will double your money for you. And that went over real good. They raised money that way to pay for the science building. And the reason, when he asked for money just for the school, they wouldn't have given as much, but when they could get that much more money out of the Yankee down here, they gave money to the school in order to beat me out of money. So you had to be a little bit foxy. And then I knew I'd been at the University of Iowa. I knew that you couldn't run a school without a library building, so I gave them a small library building. So you can look back on a very fruitful mission to your church, what your father and grandfather you had. Oh yeah, that runs all the time. Yes, and you can really see how it's been growing. Well, if you want a little philosophy of how to run a church, we go to the Grace Free Church in Davenport. They built a building here about two years ago. Now, the first thing you do in a church is you got to be sure you got a good preacher, because he's a subject that you're selling to the people. If you got a good preacher, the next thing you got to be sure of is that the people can hear it. If people come to church and they don't hear the preacher, what good is it? So when they built a building over there, I gave them the PA system so they could hear all over the church real clear. The third thing, if you have people in church, they got to get to church in order to hear it. You got to have a good parking lot, because everybody drives on the car, and they got to park the car. And if you don't have a good parking lot and it's raining, people look out and say, if we go now today, we'll get dirty. So the third thing is to get a good parking lot. We've got that far now. We have a parking lot over there. Now the last thing is that the members of the church should be the salesman, not the preacher. The preacher is like the head of a company, but his name isn't on the calling cards. It's the salesman's name. So now I've got an idea to print a calling card that says, you are invited to visit the Evangelical, the Grace Evangelical Free Church. And then the list of the meetings. And on the other side of the calling card, I put the calendar. So when somebody gets a card, if you gave them a card without the calendar, they'd just look at it and throw it away. But they keep it because the calendar's on there. And when they want to check up on dates or something, if they've got a card, it makes it easier for them. So that over there, you'll have about, they have about a hundred members. So I bought some card cases, and I put 25 business cards in each card case. And I give each member of the church, that's just a sample of the case. I don't know what's printed on it. And I give each member of the church a business card case with 25 cards, and they can hand those cards out to anybody they meet when they go for gas or in stores or different places. And that way you can help build a church up in a good systematic way, not just sit there and wait for people to come, but go out and get them. So this is really a... A church is run the same way as a supermarket. It's got to be visible and easy to get. You got to have the subject you want. The people have to hear it. You have to have a place for them to put their car when they come. And then you got to have an invitation to ask them to come over. And it's just the way as any other business. If you've got a good subject, and they can hear you, and they can park their car, then they're going to come. How much does it differ now from your time when you were a little boy up to present time, in 1936, of the religious service in the church and how it's... Well, when I was... Well, it's changed over. In the old time, the free church was all Swedish, no English. And there was a... Gustaf Johnson, preacher, for instance. He was one of them. He was a good one. I heard Gustaf Johnson. He was a cowboy from Texas. He filled all the churches and tabernacles of... Yes, but he was sort of wild. I went to a meeting up in Minneapolis where we sat in the balcony, and there was a woman that got sick in the audience. And Gustaf Johnson was preaching, and he just said, that's the devil. Get out. And the fellow sitting back of the woman got up right in the meeting. He said, Johnson, you got to apologize. He said that woman was sick. And Johnson did apologize. Otherwise, he wasn't going to... Because... Oh, yeah, he was a good one. But in the old days, the people in the church knew what they were listening to. The Moline Free Church was a tough church for a preacher because they all knew the Bible so good, the members. In the old days, they didn't have a preacher's study. They just picked up preachers as they come through. And one time, my dad told me one time, a fellow came on Sunday to preach, and he got halfway through the service. A deacon got up, and he says, you're all through. He said, get out. And the deacon got up and finished his service because the guy was preaching a philosophy that we did not believe in. And they just stopped him right there. So a new pastor, he couldn't fool the congregation then? They couldn't. My uncle Fred Nelson was preacher there for many years, and he knew so much of the Bible by heart. Oh, here's his Bible. And Fred knew so much of the Bible by heart that he would stand up there... He's talking about this uncle. This is his Bible. He stood up in the platform and preached. And he would say by memory chapters, all chapters of how it was written in the Bible. And then maybe Gus Simpson or Johnson or one of the deacons would say, nu du er de fail. And Fred would go back, and the guy and the deacon was following him in his mind, and they knew what the Bible said. So he had to go back and correct it. They knew exactly what they were preaching about. So this is Fred Strumberg's Bible. No, that's Fred Nelson. That's his mother's brother. It was Reverend Fred Nelson. 1897. Yeah, he was born 1870, I think. 1850 Nelson, yeah. Yeah. But can you imagine a Bible that was marked like that? He was the first felon. That's on my mother's side. I haven't given you that list of members of the family, but Fred came over first and earned money up around South Dakota. And then he sent money home and got some of his brothers to come over, and they earned money and sent it home so that at last my great-grandmother, no, my grandmother, my mother could come over, no, my grandmother could come over last. They always, the Swedes in the old day, they'd send one member of the family over first, and they'd have to earn the money so they could send the others over. So the old timers, they went by this. There were no alchemics or anything. There was only, if it wasn't in there, they always said, they always had a saying when they were talking about the Bible. They would say, warstuordeskrivet, and they'd have to prove where it was in the Bible that it was written. If it wasn't written in the Bible, out. So you were a young guy now when Gustav Jansson was a preacher around the circuit? Oh, yeah. I was a kid, but— What did you think about him? Was he an old timer to you with— No. He was a regular— —ideas or— No. He was a regular preacher. See, in the old days when I was a kid, I was confirmed in Swedish when I was 12 years old. And when they talk about minority groups now, I don't have any sympathy for them, but I was—because I was a minority group, I was a minority group myself. You were not too many that were confirmed in Swedish? No. Very few. In the old days, the Swedes over here were called the dumb Swedes. Well, that was good for me because I got to be an individualist. I didn't mix with people. I read an awful lot. And in the free church, they were very fundamental. They talked Swedish so that they didn't mix with the people in the town, and you were sort of a group by yourself. You just weren't part of the group. But the funny part was that the young fellas that grew up in that bunch of Swedes were the guys that were smart enough to start factories and stuff. So that when I was a kid, the old-timers didn't believe in sending kids to school. The old-timers didn't go to school. They didn't believe in education. But when their kids were born, they believed in education. So by the time the grandchildren come along, they made sure that their grandchildren went to school. Well, they probably didn't have the means to go to school themselves. No, but it was a language question. In the old days, you talked Swedish, and you were separated from other people because you talked Swedish and they talked English. But after your kids came along, they went to school, and your grandchildren went to school, and they mixed with all the rest of them, that they weren't any different. In the old days, you were different. How about the other nationalities now, like the Belgians here in Moline? Were they handicapped too, you think? They were the very same thing. In the old days, down at...