 Now he's gone. He has been dead. Here, yeah. He was here two years before I came. 1923 and 1925. From Sweden. We are together with Linnea Thyrlund in Rathbun, Norway. She was born in 1901. The first of January in Limhamn, Skåne. She went to America in 1925. So you and your husband... Linnea was born in 1900. 1901, yes. Your husband, Sture Thyrlund... Yes, he came here....he came from Närmhult. Yes, he did. And you say that he died two years before you, in 1923. Were you married in Kvelde? No, we were just friends. We were friends. And then we decided, we always said, we need so much money here in this country. Who said that? My husband. He said, long ago, we were not husband at that time, you know. And then he said, he's going to quit there, in Elmhult, he worked there, and go to this country. So he did. And two years after that, I got a ticket to come back here to him. And then he got married here when I came up here. So he sent you a ticket then? Yeah. Where were you working at that time? I was just running home with my folks. And with his mother. She was an old lady, you know, a really old lady. That's all, I was just chumming with them. So, you were 24 years of age then, at that time? No, I was born in 1901. Did you have any work then, at that time, or were you staying at home? I was home mostly. I used to work for a hospital in Kishonsta. And when I was in Malmö, I was born in Malmö. But that's all, I was here forever. I got left to live, where we had Kishonsta. Then we lived in Sibhult. Sibhult? Yeah, for all the festival years, until everybody was gone. So, where were you confirmed, now, what church? In Sibhult. Sibhult. You remember your confirmation teacher? No, I don't remember her name. I can see her, but I can't remember the name. You can't remember her name? Yeah, my God, I'm 90 years old, so I forgot all about it. So, after confirmation, did you get away from your home then and get a job? I worked in a hospital. After confirmation? After I had confirmation, I went to school and all. You worked as a nurse then? A nurse in Kishonsta hospital. How did you meet your husband, Sture, in Fyland? I met him in Malmö, as far as I can remember. Or it could be Kishonsta, too. What kind of work was he doing then? He was... He came from Elmhult? Yeah, he came from Elmhult. I can't say, but I have to say it. But he was working in a factory, you know, not less in... In Sibhult? Yeah, it was in Sibhult then. So, you were going to study then, and then he left to the United States. What was the reason? He came to Sweden first. He did. Oh, from Sweden, yeah. In Sweden. Who told him not to go to the United States? There was a good... Oh, they always thought he would go and get rich, so he was going to go there and get some money. So he told you that? He told me that he was going to go. He wanted me to go, but he wanted to go first. We were not married. We got married after. We were together, or went together for over two years. So then he decided, you don't make anything here, therefore, you know, you didn't make any money. So he said, I'm going to go to the city here, you know, and find out there how it goes. So he left me, and he was there for two years, and then I got a check to come... To take you? To come here to... He sent you a ticket? Yeah. And then he felt sorry for me when I came, for I couldn't speak English, so he said, well, we might as well get married too, then, and get done with it, and we did, and that's it. Was he able to speak English throughout the two years here? He... some, yeah, I suppose he could partly. He was here two years before I came. Here in Oxford? Yeah. No, yeah, here in Oxford. Here in Oxford? Yeah. Yeah, but here most of the people spoke Swedish till 1925, or 1923. Yeah, he left in 1923, yeah. No, but I mean, when he came here to Rockford, it was not easy to learn English, because most of the people spoke Swedish. Yeah, I know. The whole 7th Street, it was all Swedish. Oh, well, he had to learn that. He had to learn that. What kind of work did he have done when you came here? Well, he did his... Furniture worker? What? Did he work in the furniture shop? Not furniture, in... Welded something in the iron stuff, and yeah, whatever. A machinist? Yeah, that's what it is. He was a machinist. I see. That's the right time. At one of the factories here in... Yeah, yeah. So, when you left Sweden, what did your parents say then? Did they want you to go? They didn't say anything, because they... Of course, they wanted me to stay there, but we'd been gone two years, and we were planning on getting married before he left. Well, he got lonesome, and I was lonesome, so he just sent a ticket for me to come, and I flew in. So, when he left, in 1923, did you ever think he was going to come back, or you wanted to see him again? I was hoping, hoping so, but I never did come back home again. You never went back? I've never been home since 1925. So, what boat did you go on, on Draftingholm or Kungström? Draftingholm, I think it was. On Draftingholm? I think so. So, you were the first one in your family to go to the United States? No, I got two brothers in Kansas City, but I didn't go to them. Did they come first? Yeah, he was here first. Two brothers? One of them, he came, my uncle from Kansas City, came home visiting, and he felt sorry for my mother, for he had two boys and three girls. So, she asked if, he, they asked if he would let them go with them back here. So, she said, well, if he wants to go, he can go, and he went there and stayed here all this, and of course, he's gone now. What was his name? Sture Fylden, no, Sture Blom. Sture Blom? No, Gustav Blom. Oh, that was a brother to your father? That was my brother. Gustav Blom? Gustav is my brother. Well, how about your uncle in Kansas City, what was his name? Um, oh, yes. Was he a fargror or a morgror? Morgror, for my mother's two brothers. And you don't remember what his last name? Right now, I can't think of it. Because it would be your mother's last name, too, then, you see? Yeah, it was my mother's name. But you can't remember? Right now, I can't think. I know what it is, but I can't think of it right now. What about Gustav Blom, he came, then he left a few years before you did. Oh, yeah. Your brother? My brother? Yeah, they were here before I came. And the other brother, what was his name? One was Gustav, another one was? Gustav and George, I think it was. I think so, George. I had two brothers there, George and Gus. And they stayed in Kansas City, then? Yeah, they'd been, they'd gone, but they were there. What kind of work did they get, then, out there? Oh, the oldest one, he was in business with... Your uncle? No, he was my two brothers. I know, but he went with his uncle, though, back over. No, I went, I went, went... Well, your uncle visited Sweden. He took the two brothers, your brothers, with him, back. He, they were, they were my brothers, he went to Kansas City. Yeah. And then they decided they wanted me to come there. Oh, I see. And I just flew over there. That's all, how quick that happened. So I went to my husband, he was used to flying. Flying, you came with a boat? Yeah, sure I did. You never saw, you never been to Kansas City, then? It must have been when I come there first, in the beginning. You took the train down there, then? But the boat, not the... I mean, from Rockford to Kansas City, you took the train. From Rockford, you know, this was from Malmö, Sweden, and I went there. You took the boat over, then? Yeah. From, and it was Drottningholm. But then, after you came to Rockford, you probably visited your brothers in Kansas City. No, I never been. You never met them? I never been back either there or to Lindholm. So you never see your brothers in Kansas City? No. And they never came here either? Yes, the boys had been here. So they visited you? Yeah, but I never, never... You never went down there? I came here with my boyfriend. Well, instead of go out to work, I got married, and you know what had happened then. And you stayed home? I had to stay home. I never sent to... So you never worked in Rockford? No, I haven't been working. Oh, yes, I did. I worked in the Kutztown Hospital. Yeah, I mean, but here in Rockford? No, here I never worked there. You never worked? No. So we were married here then. So you were married, and you raised a family then. How many children did you have then with, in your marriage? I think I had, I couldn't tell anymore. Four. Three. And, four boys, I think. Two boys? I think there were four boys. Couldn't tell anymore. Well, three or two. I know there were three for sure, but there could be four or two. I can't even remember my own family for all those years. My God, I have been here 60 years. Are they still living though? No. Your children? Oh, my children, yeah. Yeah? Yeah, they are. They are already... Do you have three boys and one daughter? I can't remember. One, two... Three boys and a girl are here, you know. Three boys and a girl. And they are here in Rockford? Yeah, exactly. The daughter and one girl and two or three of them. Three boys and two girls. One girl... Two girls, when I say that, it means myself and my sister. Oh, I see. The rest was the boys. Three boys. So you have one daughter then? Yeah. And three sons. Mm-hmm. So how was the travel over? You had any problems at Ellis Island, for instance, when you came there? No. I was just sitting there and following the rest of them, that's all, until I came to New York. And then Stuart, my husband, you know, both of the first men at that time. Oh, he met you in New York? He came and met us. In New York? In New York, yeah. Oh, I see. And then you took the train there? And then we came from there, where he worked here in this town. In Rockford, yeah. Yeah. So that's the only town you've been in then? That's where I've been. You've never been outside Rockford? No, I never, except the little towns in Little on there, but they don't mean anything. So you never went back to Sweden again? Never. After my mother and dad, they died shortly after, about four years after I left. I should have stayed home a long time for that, you know, but that happened, and after that, then... Did you correspond then with your sisters and brothers over in Sweden? Oh, yeah. You wrote letters to them back home? Yeah, I always hear from them, you know. Did they write to you and want to come over after you? What did you say then? I was just in love with them, so I just took off, that's all. But I know your other brothers and sisters now in Sweden, did they want to come over here to you? They never come over here, but there were two of them come here to live, the one in Kansas City. Oh, two, but you still have one left over there, one brother? Yeah, I still got one in Sweden. And two sisters? No sisters in Landa, not there. I only had one sister, she's gone a long time ago. Oh, I see. Yeah. Now you only have three, five boys and two girls, the family. Three boys and two girls, yeah. Yeah, and that's it. So she died many years ago, your sister? She died lately, right now, I don't know for sure, but I had a letter from her about four months ago, and she asked me why I didn't write. And after that, I did write, but one letter came back, and we don't know what happened. I got a daughter here in town, and she was going to find out what happened. You would think that they would let us know when she died, but we haven't heard anything, and we don't know nothing. Your sister? And they were here, but... In Kansas City? Yeah, and they were here. What happened to the one left in Sweden? Did he die then? Well, after the... What do you mean? Your brother in Sweden, did he die then? Oh, yeah, yeah. No, did I hear them two. Your brother in Sweden? Yeah, he died home. He died in Sweden? He died in Sweden, yeah, the younger one. But the other two boys died here, they were older than I am. I'm the third one, and then my dad's brother, he died home. So after... Do you write to Sweden now, I mean, to your children? I have written about three, four months ago, and I never heard back. So then my daughter, I got a daughter here in town, you know. Who did you write to them? Send the same address to them, for we know that one of them, my brother, I think it was, that couldn't be my dad. Anyhow, they wrote to them, and he must have got the letter, but nobody wrote back to us. For the letter didn't come back. Who was it that you wrote to? Was it a brother's children? No, the daughter was my sister. Do you understand that? Oh, she was there, you said? What? Your sister was over here in Iraq? Yeah, I had one, not in Iraq, my older sister, I was twice, that's why I get mixed up. But she'd been here in this country all the time, ever since she come early, early, when she was little. Was your sister? Yeah, so she is, we don't know if she is in hospital, for she's been living up to the last, well for the last six months or maybe a year. No, I can't get that back out of my head, when you don't hear from them, you don't know anything. And I had a lot of relatives there, but they never write either, so they are all gone. But your sister, where did she live here in the United States, in Iraq? Your sister? In Sweden, my sister. In Sweden? She was in Sweden. She was never in the United States? She was not here, yeah. It's hard to remember all that stuff, you know, I never think of it, everything is gone, you know. Yeah, it's hard to remember. And your husband, when did he die? He died, home, I have to say, about this few months after my mother died. Oh, my husband, you say? Yeah, your husband. My husband. Here in Rockport? Yeah, it wasn't very long ago, I don't know, maybe three or four years ago, four years, maybe four years, I can't think of it, but it wasn't very long, you know. So then you moved into this home here? Then I came into this home, yeah. P.A. Peterson's home? Yeah, that's where I ended up. I couldn't be, you know, before that my husband was sick and he was in bed, this was in a day, and I used to go out, you know, to get up and get some fresh air and rest from him. And some guy beat me up, got me on the floor and beat me up in my neck, and I think he wanted some money, and I said, if the money you want, I haven't got it. And he just beat me and beat me in my neck, you know. Was this your home? Huh? Was this your own home? My own home, right here in town. That's where my husband was, sick in the bedroom, and he heard it, and he said, Ma, are you okay, are you okay? And I couldn't say it, I couldn't answer him, because I was an idiot, he was beating me too, so I just passed out, and then he ran away, and nobody got hold of me. And that, that kills you when you think of it. Oh. And it was in the daytime? Yes, late in the afternoon. Where did you live? Right out in the street, outside where I live. Where did you live in Rockford, then? Here in Rockford. I know, but what street? 24th Street. No, 24th Street. 24th Street? I think that's where I was, 24th Street, yeah. Yeah, it must have been. Uh-huh. Yeah, for then after that, after that happened, then I got rid of everything, and I didn't get rid of it, because this is my own stuff that I got, you know. But I couldn't stay there, so I got up here, and that's why I'm here, after all that. Promotion. Yeah. And your husband, he died, was he with you here, too? No, he died before that. Before that. Yeah. He, well, he, yeah, he died from, when he, when he took him to the hospital, they had him downstairs on the first floor. But when it got lower and lower, you know, there, he used to sit and talk. And it's only about four or five, five years, not long ago. So, which church do you belong to here? Luton? Zion Luton Church. Zion Luton Church. Yeah. You married there in Zion Luton? Yeah. Oh, and you sent your children there, too, for Sunday school and confirmation? They are going up, all my kids. And, I mean, did they go to Zion Church also to be confirmed? I, they belong, yeah, they belongs there, I imagine. They all by themselves, all going up, all got married. Yes, but I mean, when they were growing up, did they go to Sunday school in Zion Luton? Oh, yeah. And confirm there also? Yeah, yeah. Oh. Did you belong to any organizations, like Vasa, Switzerland? No, I didn't. My husband belongs to one, I don't remember what it was, up by the club, like they call it, you know. But I wasn't, I wasn't into anything. You didn't belong to anything? I had all the time to take care of the family. It was a full-time job? Yeah. Oh. No, life is funny. When a person had to go through it once more, you will know more, you know. You don't want to go through it again? No. I would love to go home. I've been telling my kids there, I wish that we could go home to Sweden. No, not to Sweden. Yeah, to Sweden, I guess. Used to, used once more, but didn't ever go. I shouldn't say that either, for our daughter and son, they are right here. They went and they didn't tell me. They were afraid I was going to get sick on the trip, you know. So they didn't tell me before they came home. And they went home and visited the rest of them home there. But I didn't get there. Did you tell them then where to go, I mean, in Sweden? How did they know where to go? Oh, they, yes, they were here too. Lately, two of the boys went home, and my daughter. Yeah, but they never been in Sweden. No, but they went there anyway. I know, but why didn't they ask you where to go in Sweden? They were afraid that I was going to get sick. They were not going to be, have any trouble, you know, that's all. They never told me before they come back home. Yeah, but wouldn't it be better to have you with and tell them where to go and see people? Yeah, they should have done it, but they didn't do it. What did they tell you when they came back? They didn't say much. They just happened to say that, well, really, they didn't say much, anything, for they feel kind of shame of it, in a way, you know. But I think they were afraid that I was going to get sick, for I've been wanting to go home for a long time, you know. Yet today I said that I wish I could go home once more just to see. Because there are a lot of differences there, you know, there are people that I don't know or anything, but I got a sister home yet, and some other relatives I imagined, if I look them up. Did they meet your sister in Sweden then? No, I don't think they did. What was the reason to go home then, to Sweden? They just wanted to go for a trip, that's all, just to see what's what. But they never been there, you know. I know that, but why you would think they would meet your sister, though, and talk to her and bring greetings from you? Yeah, well, afterwards he said, when he come back, and then he told me they had been there. And I've been saying so many, many times, I wish I was only going to go home once more just to see how it is there. There might not be anybody anymore left who I know anymore, you know, if I've been here for 25, 30 years now. So I used to forget about all that home, you know. It don't matter much either, so long as... It's still at that area, people been grown up after we left. So there is families anyhow. Some of them, but I used to forget about everything. What is it that you miss from Sweden, you'd like to see again? I would like to see friends that I had there. So long as my mother and nobody else is there except friends. I still wanted to have very nice friends there, that we always were together. But they probably gone too, for all I know, I don't know. You haven't written to anybody, you don't know if they are still alive? I have, maybe a couple of months now, but I never hear that from Beck, you know, because she might be gone, you know. You know, there are a lot of things that comes to you, but you can think of it. Were you homesick the first couple of years when you came here to Rockport? No, not really. You didn't tell Stude that you wanted to go back to Sibb once again? No, no, I was glad I came to see him. I had my mother home, and she... Of course, she would rather see me stay home, but the situation, she didn't want to say either way, you know. So she said, it's all right, if you like, you think you should go, you go. So I did go, but I never did get to come back again. When I come, I was supposed to go out and learn to speak English. How did you learn to speak English, if you didn't take a job? You were home all the time. With the rest of them, because the rest of them, they talked English. Who? The ones that I came with them. Yeah, but I mean, most of your friends, they were Swedish. Yeah, well, they knew the Swedish here, the ones I... But how did you learn English, then, if they all talked Swedish here? Well, they tried to tell me how to say what to say, you know. How about your children, though, when they start to get big and get into school? They talk English to you, or did you talk to them? No, they talk... Swedish? Swedish. No, English. English? Not Swedish. Are they able to talk Swedish now, your kids? No. Only the couple of older ones, one daughter and two boys, they... Understand Swedish? They understand it, yeah. Yeah, one of my sons, he lives in Sterling. He just took a trip, and he didn't tell me that he was going to go. He went, and he went... So I'm old, I guess. And that was the end of the interview with Trillinia Fyrlund in Rockford, Illinois. End of interview.