 Yeah, we have 21st of November 1986 and I'm sitting together with Gene Espling in Rockford, Illinois. He was born 1902, the 5th of November in Skultuna, Sweden and came to the United States in March of 1903. Your parents now, your father Frank Otto Espling, what kind of work was he doing in the... Machinist. Machinist. Yeah. And he was outstanding in that kind of work. Did he have a superintendent job over there or anything like that? No, no. Just a trainer. Yeah. So he probably worked at Skultuna where they make stainless. Yeah. So then he decided to move on. To come, to move to this country. What was the reason for that? I don't know. Outside of, they thought there would be more opportunities in this country than over in Sweden. But I am amazed at the, well should I say the nerve and the fortitude and everything it takes to make a decision to leave Sweden not knowing one word of English. And coming to this country, which they did. Did he have anybody here, a relation or? Only some friends of ours that were on a farm down there. I don't know that they are some distant relative of ours. His name was Carl Johnson. He was farming down by, not too far from Davis Junction. So that was the person he contacted then probably when he first came over or? Yeah. That he was supposed to go to live with them, you know, to bring the family down there and stay with them until he could get situated and find work. And that was very easy for him to do was to get another job, you know, here. That was easy because he was very skilled. But he didn't know that at the time when he moved though? He didn't have any secure? No, none at all. No, none at all. So how big of a family was it? You were five months old? I was five months old. You had another brother? I had two twin brothers, two years old. And then my mother's sister come over with us also. She was supposed to help take care of the kids, you know, because I suppose I was a crybaby five months old, you know. And the two, the twins were ill from the time they got on the boat and were still sick when they landed here in this country. And I can't remember exactly. I think that the main liner that we come in on terminated our trip at Davis Junction, I think that's what it was. And there we boarded another small train. We called it the milk train because he stopped whenever he saw a milk can, he stopped and took it off and let the empties off. And that's the one that we, the main train would not stop for anything but Davis Junction. The other one that we took, I don't know for sure whether they went on the main line or not, but it was just an engine, freight car, and one passenger car and a caboose. And every time he saw a milk can or something or anything on that platform, he would stop and pick it up, which was built to the level of the car so they just slid them off on there into the freight car. So the farmers, they had good service then on the way back. Oh yeah. Yeah. And on the voyage down the ocean, that was probably from Liverpool then coming over. Your parents never told you about the name of the ship or anything like that? No, I never did ask them about that. Like the North Line or White Star Line or anything? No, I don't recall. How was the trip then? Did they tell you about that? What happened? Well, Dad was all right, but I guess my, her sister and the kids and her got seasick, but Dad did not get seasick, so he made it. And how about the kids now? Were you all right? You probably don't remember, but I mean… No, I don't, but I think we all were kind of sick and the twins were running a fever and were not well at all. So there was probably a, but there was no way to turn back? No, no, no. It was just to go forward, that's all. Did they tell you anything about Ellis Island when you entered New York? No, they didn't have any problem there. They went right through there all right. And they, of course, they couldn't speak any English. It was kind of a handicap, you know. But your aunt and your mother's sisters, she was with you all the way? Yeah. So did you end up, this person, was it called Johnson, what was his name? Yeah. You stayed in there for a while? After some diffugalties. First of all, we got on this little train and started to, I don't know the name, I can't remember the name of the little town that we were supposed to get off at, but the conductor forgot to tell us or look at the ticket, so we overshot the regular stop and went, I don't recall, it seems to me they went 20 miles beyond. Then he said, oh my, he explained to them that they'd have to get off. So he let them off and as I recall him telling me that there was no railroad station, anything, but just a platform. And there they dumped off the few things that we had necessary, you know, that we took with because the trunks with the large items in that was shipped separately. So there they stood on that platform, mother and dad and three kids and two of them were sick, ill. And dad looked around and he says, the homes were few and far apart around there, you know, but he happened to see a black man walking by, close by, so he says to mother, I'm going over and talk to him. Mother says, not a black man, he'll never understand your Swedish. Oh yes, dad says, I bet he can speak Swedish. So he went over to him and addressed him in Swedish and he answered him. And he said, do you understand Swedish? And he says, yes, I can speak Swedish. He says, I see you got a problem, he says, you're supposed to meet somebody here. Yes, he says, I'm supposed to meet somebody here, but they overshot, so we should have stopped 20 miles further down the road before we got here. So he just dumped us off here and here we are. Oh my, he says, that wasn't so good. Well, he says, we'll have to see if we can get a hold of your, the people that you're supposed to stay with. And he gave them the name and that's all, he didn't have any telephone number or anything like that. Well, he says, we gotta find a place for you to stay. And so he says, I got some friends back here, a couple of miles from here. I'm gonna call them and ask them if they will take care of you, put you up till you get a hold of your Mr. Johnson that you're gonna stay with. And they said, yes, bring them in, they'll be welcome here. So we went in and stayed by that family till the following day. Then they got a hold of, they couldn't get a hold of him that day, but the following day they got a hold of Carl. And then when they told him where he was, he says, it's a long trip for my horses to go to where you are now, but I'll be there, he said, and pick you up. So he did. But you can imagine 20 miles further to go with horses. Was there a train going back the other direction that you could have hopped on? No, no, no, no, there wasn't anything. And this was still in the winter season, though, in March? Yeah, but it happened to be pretty decent weather, I guess, so they didn't suffer too much from that. And I guess they were pretty hardened, those Swedes were kind of tough, I guess, anyway. So they had to have patience in those days, there was no way to rush anything. No, you better believe not. But people were very friendly then, in other words, was it a Swedish family you stayed overnight with? Yeah, I guess they were, yeah. And the place was? I don't remember, but it was only a couple of miles from where the conductor dumped us off. But as I recall the parents saying, there was no station or anything like that, it was just a platform. And he realized his mistake and he couldn't do anything about it. That's right. So this colored man, he apparently had worked for some Swedish family. Yeah, evidently he had, so he knew enough Swedish so he could talk to them. And he felt real bad, and he was a kindly old man, and he says, I'll call these people and see if we can arrange for you to stay there. So they said, we'll be over there with the horse and Suri, not a buggy, because the buggy is too small, you know. And pick up the whole family and all their belongings and took them down there and we stayed with them until the next day. Then Carl come down with a team and picked us up. Had he been here long, this Carl Johnson in this country? Yeah, he was farming here, so he had, I don't know, I never did question him about how long he had been here, but he was quite a successful farmer and he had a large farm that he was renting, but he was doing all right. Did you meet him years after you had grown up? Did you meet this Carl Johnson at any time? Yeah, yeah. Yeah. His mother said that I was his favorite, so when we were down on the farm there way on. So how long did you stay then with him? Well, Dad got busy and start, well, first of all, the twins got real sick, and one of them died two days after we arrived down there. So they made the arrangements for a funeral, then the other one died. They got measles, which didn't break out, and the two of them died. Do you wonder what kind of food, you were still nursing, of course, your mother, but the twins now, how could they get any milk or any food enough to sustain any… You mean on the farm or… No, I mean on the trip now, because it was a long trip. Yeah, well, I don't… Probably got stomach problems and diarrhea. I don't know, really. They don't know… All we know is that they didn't do well because they got measles and broke out, and to land over there on this farm, and two days after we had arrived, both of them were dead. So then they had to make funeral arrangements for them up at the, I think it was the Cedar Bluff Cemetery in Rockford, and the two of them were buried there. But I was okay, and I didn't get sick, so I was okay, and my mother's sister was a young girl, she was okay, and the parents were all right too as far as that goes. So your father then, he didn't start to work on the farm? No, no. He only stayed with them for a week, I guess, and you see the problem was transportation. So he, Carl took him up in the morning, which was, I don't know how long it took him, and he stayed overnight somewhere while he went out and looked for work, and he found a job immediately so he could go to work. So he went to work the following week, I think, and then he started, so the mother and us kids stayed down there, or I, kids, I shouldn't say, just one, and my sister, mother's sister, they stayed there while Dad went up, and he stayed somewhere in a motel or hotel or someplace until he got located and they got a place to stay. But they didn't have much money either, you know, very little, just enough to get them over here. So he had to, I think what he did, I think he worked in town for two weeks, and then he, well, in the meantime they had buried the two children. Who performed the burial rites? Was it a Swedish pastor down there? Well, I guess it was. I don't know anything about it. Do you know the location of the graves then? Did the parents, would they bury them? Do I? Yeah. No, I don't. I wonder a lot of times if I could find it. So there was no mark or anything put up there at that time? No, oh no, no, just one of those pegs with a nameplate on it, so that probably is destroyed now too, so there probably is no record of it or anything else, I don't know. But there must have been a tremendous entrance, I mean, for not knowing the language and hardships immediately. Yeah, of course, when Dad got into the factory, he found people who could speak Swedish, so they, and I don't know about the farm, and of course there was a lot of Swedish spoken in Rockford then, you know, so it wasn't too bad. So you moved, did you stay on the farm then with this Carl Johnson for a while, and your parents settled down here? No, no, after Dad got a place for us to stay, then we were moved into Rockford and he had his job to go to and started life in Rockford. Where did he settle then in Rockford, on the east side? Yeah. Closer to downtown? I don't recall, I think that the place that they found was over on 20th Avenue, off of 20th Avenue and 7th Street. And I can remember, I was only five months old then, but after I got to be a year or two, we still lived there and we walked on the plank sidewalks. They didn't have any sidewalks, but they were real up to date. They had planks laid, not lengthwise, but about five foot lengths laid one after the other. And then Mudge Street's in the middle? Yeah. Well, yeah, there was a streetcar alright in one place. Not at first there wasn't, but after a short time there was one that went to 7th Street and went out and made a loop out there just beyond National Lock, the old plant. And it's on 11th Street? 20th Street and 7th Street. And a lot of horses then at that time when you started to grow up in the town. That's all there was, horses and buggies all over. They were coming in then from the farms or did people in town also have horses? Yeah, oh yes. Yes, all deliveries were done by horses. Or you walked. We did a lot of walking those days. Do you remember when you got a little bit older now, if there were a lot of stores nearby where you lived or did you have to walk far to a grocery store for instance? Yeah, they had to walk, well, from where we stayed to where they could buy groceries and that was, would be on 7th Street further down toward 5th Avenue, which was quite a walk. But then they got to know you, then they'd take an order and deliver your groceries to you, see? And there was no extra charge for that? Not for delivering, no. That was, I can remember the days when a fellow would come down on bicycle to take the order and then a horse and buggy come with a, delivering the order or a little wagon like, you know, with a box in the back and a can of kerosene because there was no electric, you know, you had kerosene lamps and so forth. And when they took these orders, he was able to speak Swedish then with the people I suppose? Oh yeah. It was a Swedish neighborhood you were living in then? Yeah. Yeah, there were both, but there was enough Swedish people around there so they had people to converse with and yeah. And the stores now, were they owned by Swedes? Mostly, yeah. 7th Street was known as the place where the Swedes got together on Friday and Saturday night after work, you know, and stood on the street corners and talked. Did also families do that or there was only bachelors and young people or did old people also come down there to converse with each other? Oh yeah. And they took the kids with them then? Yeah, yeah. Yeah, they, well, I remember my parents would take me and walk down 7th Street to the stores, you know, the grocery stores and that. And I can remember when I was just, well, getting ahead of my story a little bit, but I was about three years old, they bought me a little tricycle. So I was in 7th Heaven, you know, a bicycle. Were you able to use that one on the sidewalk then? Well, down on 7th Street, they also had, I don't recall if there was sidewalk with street, 7th Street and all the rest of the streets were laid with brick, not cement. Now with either brick, and then when that let off, it was just mud and sand, see? But in front of the buildings, there were probably some sort of cement, I don't know. But I remember later on, when we moved into a place down on 12th Avenue, they had sidewalks down there. And that's where I used my little tricycle. That came in handy. Yeah. And how about the horses? Now, did they tie them up outside the stores? Oh yeah. On the street? Yeah. Sure. They didn't go back in the alley? No, they tied them right on 7th Street there. I don't know if they used the alleys for anything but for deliveries. No, the horses were parked like automobiles are today, you know. And the sidewalk was elevated a little bit so you could step right out of the wagon? No, no. All the way down? Oh yeah. Yeah, maybe some mud to step in before you got to the sidewalk. Because you know some western towns out in Nebraska, they have it elevated. Oh yeah, no. They didn't have the hair? No, uh-uh. I can remember when we walked from 20th Avenue to church on Sundays and back, I'd walk on those planks, you know, and they'd rock. But it was nice to have planks to walk on. You didn't walk in the mud anyway. So that was a beginning to a more modern town. Yeah. And so you didn't have any brothers and sisters then? You were the only child then? Yeah. The other two were buried. So your dad then, his first job was in a factory? Yeah. And he could continue with his trade? Yeah. He was a machine, he was a lathe hand preferably is what he excelled in. Was there a preference for him then, he was a tradesman from Sweden? He had no rough time to get a job, in other words he knew exactly what he was doing and what he was looking for. Yeah. Oh yeah. When he got in and talked to the employment man, he talked Swedish and he explained to him what experience he had. Yeah, we got a job for you. And at that time, there was more furniture than metal though in Rockport. Right, yeah. But who were the metal factories? I think where he got his first job was at Mechanics, Mechanics Universal, no I don't know, it was Mechanics anyway, Mechanics I think it was Universal Joint. It was a one story building right back of National Lock. National Lock was just not what it was afterwards, you know. It was a small beginning. Yeah. Yeah, Hoagland was the beginning. Yeah. How about Sundstrand, were they starting up then at the time? No, there was no such thing as Sundstrand. You mentioned this Universal Joint, were they making parts then for automotive industry or for farm machinery? I don't know how they used them, I don't know what the name, what they picked the name up from, I don't know. But I know Dad worked there for quite a few years. And there was also a lot of foundries that molded things. Yeah, yeah. And then we, let's see, we moved from 20th Street down to some couple of years later, two, three years later to a place off of 20th Street along the creek. Did he buy the first place then when he moved in there or did he rent it? Rent. Oh, we didn't have anything to buy with. So we moved into a place down there, it was a farm, it's still there, I think the house is still there too. Small house, very close to the creek. And a fellow by the name of Bone, and I think he spelled his name B-O-N-E-E, he rented this house from him. And then Dad got a bad rheumatism that he couldn't walk. He couldn't even stand on his feet. How old was he then at that time? He couldn't have been too old. No. How old was Dad you mean? Yeah, you see, I was only, yeah, I was only about four or five years old then. So he, they're setting the rheumatism then? Yeah. But he started out riding his bicycle from over there out to Greenlees. He finally got a job over at Greenlees. And he worked there for eleven or twelve years I guess, enough to regain, or to pick up a very good reputation over there for a study worker and a good mechanic or machinist. Were they also Swedish speaking at Greenlees? Oh yeah. Oh yeah, there was a lot of Swedes in there. So he felt pretty much at home there, you know. So did you move closer to Greenlees or you were already out there? I was, we stayed there till, I was seven years old when I started school. And I went to John Nelson. And I'd walk up there to John Nelson, you know, that's must be a mile and a half I guess. Of course nice beautiful paved roads and sidewalks, you know. Like fun. It was mud and pastures. Did you have other schoolmates living in the same area you could walk with or were you alone? No, I was alone. Yeah. And I can remember one time a dam broke up in Wisconsin and I had, oh yeah, dad bought a cow. He borrowed some money, no he borrowed money to buy a cow from a friend of ours and so we could have milk, you know. Was there was the intention that when you moved out there to the creek to have some? We were looking for a little ranch, I don't know, but then we had a barn there with us so these friends of ours, his name was Turnrose, he says, you ought to have a cow. You got plenty of pasture around here and so forth so dad bought a cow. And I remember he crawled on his hands and knees out the barn to milk that cow because mother could not milk. She hadn't learned to milk yet. And he crawled out there and crawled up on a little stool and milked the cow. And then that milk was cooled and we found we had more milk than we needed. So dad made a little cart for me and I'd take six or seven quarts of milk or eight, whatever it was, in this little wagon and I walked in the morning down to 12th Avenue and 8th Street and the people down there bought my milk from me. And then I'd turn around and walk back with this little cart. So you were an entrepreneur then? Yeah. I was only, I was six years old I think. How much did they pay them? There was like a quart then? I don't have any idea. Every day? Every day. So you did this before you started school then? Yeah. I was only six years old and it was quite a ways to walk and over that creek which flooded quite regularly and run over its banks, you know. And one time when a bank, one of the dams broke up in Wisconsin and in a matter of minutes the whole area was flooded. And I was up on a high spot over by Nelson School on Charles Street delivering milk to some people by the name of Bloom and some of the neighbors over there. And they looked out and they saw that water and they said, my, how are you going to get home now? Well, I don't know. You better stay right here. So mother come out and she saw what had happened and she got all excited and figured I was going to get drowned, you know. So she started out, went over the high spots and ended up and got down to 7th Street. That was a long ways around and she couldn't get across the creek down there. So a kind gentleman with a buggy come along and he says, would you like to get a ride across there? He says, with the help? Oh, she says, I'd sure like that. So she thanked him and he got her across and the water was so deep, you know, almost into the buggy, water flowing over. And when she got over across, she started on the run to get over to this place where Bloom's. That was, I imagine, another mile to go back over. But she got down there and there I was. Then started the trek home again and this water hadn't receded, you know. But she managed and she got me with her and got across the creek again, walked around that big circle and got home. But it sure scared both mother and dad. You talk about this creek now, is there a spur to Kishwaukee then? It's Kent Creek. Oh, Kent Creek. Yeah. So they get so violent in the years back when Wisconsin opened up its… Well, the dam broke and let all that water down at once, you know. How long did it take then to…? A couple of days and then the water had gone through and then it was all right. However, it did flood in the spring of the year. And I remember one time I had to go over to some people by the name of Hedbergs because they had chickens and I was going to buy a dozen eggs and bring home. And I had to go barefoot, of course, because it was easier to get around barefoot, you know. And I got across the creek. It wasn't very deep. It was just six, eight inches, you know. And I got across there all right. There was a lot of water flooding around the edge of the creek, but that wasn't too bad. I got down to Hedbergs and they told me, they gave me a dozen eggs and I started home with them. And they said, now be very careful when you go around that tree down there because it's slippery. Well, I was real careful, but it was too slippery and I fell. And I can remember I sat on the eggs, I guess. I threw the rest of them in there and went home. I told mother she didn't have any eggs. No scrambled eggs? No. So you were quite busy then going to school and then having… I hadn't started school yet. I was only six. I see. I was only six, yeah. And then when I was seven years old, mother says, well, you've got to get started to go to school. So I took off from there every morning, you know. And I would, two times, one time a week, maybe twice a week later, the grocery man that we bought our grocery from would meet me in the school room. And I'd go in there early and meet him and give him the order, both verbally and written, for my groceries. Did you still speak Swedish then with your family? Oh, yeah. I couldn't speak much English when I started school. I couldn't speak much English. Did you play around with the same age group to learn some English? Up at school, but where I lived, there wasn't any children within a mile of my place. So… You were isolated a little bit out there. Yeah. But I got along all right. I soon learned the language with the kids in the school, so that was all right, you know. But it tickles me to think that this grocery man, he didn't want to walk all the way out or ride his bicycle out to where we lived, so he'd wait until I come to school, and then he'd meet me down there. And then they would, first the deliveries were made by horse and buggy. And later on in years, he got real modern, and when he didn't get stuck in the mud, he got there in a little Ford truck. So then they were getting up in the world, you know. But to think that he'd come out there and pick up the order at the school, you know, and then deliver it. So they took some planning. Yeah, and then they always had that can of kerosene on the back end, which had to be by itself so it didn't contaminate the groceries. Do you remember if the food and the merchandise in the store smelled kerosene? You could have that in your… Oh yeah, sure. It was a tremendous order that went through the store. Oh yeah, yeah. But people were used to it, I suppose. There was no complaining. No, Dad didn't bother. He didn't get sick and die from any of that, you know. Yeah. And then how about, did your parents join the church then? Or were you too far away out there? No, we were too far away. We couldn't go. Too far away, yeah. But once in a great while, Dad didn't go, but Mother would go and she'd take one of us with us and walk down the church, you know. And that was down at the free church on Fourth and on Sixth, the one they taught. The old free church? Yeah, uh-huh. Yeah. So you went to Sunday school then when you later… Oh no, I didn't go to Sunday school. You didn't go to Sunday school? I didn't. I couldn't. Too far to go. But I'll tell you, I can remember when we didn't have enough to eat in the house before we got that cow. And, you know, before we had a spot for a garden out there, but we hadn't, we rented the place at the wrong season to get a garden in there, see. And there was no welfare, no food stamps, I'll tell you. And Dad then, his rheumatism got a little better, so he rode his bike and walked part of the way and he went to work half days out to Greenleaf's. And he worked five hours and that's all he could stand in the shop, see. Then he'd start for home. Till he got a little bit better. But the doctor told him, an old gentleman, I don't remember what his name was, but he was a kindly old doctor, he says, it's too damp where you're living. You have to get into higher ground. You've got to get away from that area. So Dad took his bike and rode up one day up in Rockview on 18th Avenue. And there was a fellow who was building a house up there. His name was Lunn, L-U-N-D. He was building. And Dad went in and introduced himself and he says, you're building this house to sell? And he said, yes. He said, would you like to buy it? Yeah, Dad says, but I don't have any money. Oh, well that don't make any difference, he says. That's all right, we can get together on that. And before Dad had left, the house was only about half finished. But he had agreed to do part of the work himself and then we had no electricity, no water, anything. We didn't even have a well up there. We did finally dig a cesspool, so we had the water from the kitchen sink drained into that. And then we had the outside plumbing, you know, real nice. Dad built one of those too. It was there. Yeah. But how did you get the drinking water? Well, that was another thing. Because the creek was too low in the summer, I suppose, so you couldn't drink that kind of water. Well, when we were down by Bones, we got the water from his well, which was higher up, see. But now we had, after this meeting he had with Mr. Lund over there, and I can remember him, he had nails in his mouth, you know, and he'd take the nails out so he'd have them handy, see. And that little pouch in the front, and he'd take a few of them from it and he'd talk with the nails in his mouth. And he says, well, he says, if you're interested, he says, you come back in a couple of weeks and we'll see how much there is left here and then we'll agree on a price. So Dad had worked enough so he saved up, so he had $50. So I think Lund sold the place to him for $1,200. And Dad paid him $50 down. That's all right. No papers or anything. He just took $50 and then he paid so much a month on it until he got it into such shape that he could get a mortgage on it. And he got our first mortgage loan down at Freeport. And that was quite an ordeal to get down there, too, you know. Why didn't he go to Rockford to invest? I don't know. There wasn't very many banks. So the one in Freeport, maybe he knew somebody there. Well, I guess they specialized in this kind of mortgage or something. How did they, they were supposed to ask for collateral, I mean, for some security at the bank. What did he show them as collateral, I mean, to... I told him I got two good hands and I work hard and he says I don't cheat anybody and I said, well, that's all right. Those days, you know, a handshake meant a lot those days, see. So, and then they corresponded with Lund, you know, and he says I've got a down payment of $50 on the place and he's going to finish it up. What, there was a parcel with this land to them, I mean, the land, how much, an acre or... One lot, 50 foot wide and 100 foot deep. There was no room for a car anymore then? Oh, no, you didn't have any cars. A cow? Oh, a cow, oh no, no, over there. No, no, we had to sell the cow and we moved from bones up there to that. All those, a lot of people around there had cows. Lundbergs furnished us with milk and they were, oh. So but there was a setback though, they couldn't have the cow with you anymore, in other words, there was a good source of... Yeah, but by that time we lived closer to the work and Dad got to work and he was working full 10, 12 hours a day then, see. So we were in clover, he had a good job making money, you know. But before that there was a shortage of funds and also food. Oh yeah, I can remember one time some friends of ours had heard about our, should I say, our plight out there so they sent some people over from church to visit with us and ask us if there was anything we needed and well, Mother says, I guess we get along alright but we don't have much. I think they, it seems to me that they gave Mother $5 I think to buy some groceries with and that was the only help we ever got. I suppose their pride wouldn't reveal how bad it was, they kept it for themselves, it was hard times. Well, there was no, you mean the folks? Yeah, I mean your parents, they wouldn't go out and beg for it. Oh no, no, no, that was, they wouldn't ask anybody, you know, and nobody was interested. I mean, you see we were not tied into the church well enough so they knew us either, but how they got to come out there that time was through this Bloom family up there on Charles Street told them they should go out and visit with them. Yeah, but Dad had gotten better then so he could work a half a day. Did he get recuperated then from his arthritis? Yes he did, he never got really good but he could walk, yeah. Did he go to doctors for treatments? Yeah, but they couldn't do anything for him. He just said it was rheumatism and I think it was from the dampness down there. And when we moved up on 18th Avenue, there we were up on the hill and it was high and dry and his legs got much better. Talking about this Krichter, what kind of a house was it? Was it a two room house with an upstairs or? The Bones place. Yeah, where you were in the powder. Yeah, I think it was, it was a very small house and it was a kitchen and one room, probably three rooms downstairs and I think there was one room upstairs, sort of like an attic like. And one heating source then, the wood stove in the kitchen. Yeah. Nothing else? No. Where did you sleep then, in the upstairs room in the summer or? Well, we slept downstairs and upstairs too. I think we only had two bedrooms, the one downstairs and then the one upstairs. But there was no heat in those? No, no heat, no. No, all we had was the kitchen stove for heat. That was it. Yeah, you'd come down there and thaw the icicles out of your joints. So, but you never get anything in your joints? No, no, no. You buckle up and slept all night through? Yes, yeah, they bundled me in and I kept warm I guess. Do you remember now what you had for breakfast before you went to school? You had oatmeal or? I had oatmeal probably eight or nine times a week. And then mother got, so we could buy flour and she baked bread and rolls. So we had plenty of bread and… Did you drink coffee at your age then, before you started school? No, I had milk. Milk. When there was milk to be had. But they used coffee, though? Yeah, they used coffee, yeah. So you didn't have too many visitors then? No. When you lived out there? No, not even kids my own age and the folks didn't either. It was too far out. Yeah. And this Bone, he was kind of a fellow that was pretty much to himself. I mean, there wasn't much. He'd just come back to collect the rent. I don't remember how much that was. It wasn't very much. Did you stay over the winter there? We lived over there for a couple of years. For years? Yeah. How were the winters then? They must have been… Oh, yeah, it was tough. Must have been nasty. Yeah. Yeah, when it snowed, it got deep. The big old snow plows come down there and plowed the road for us like fun, you know. What kind of snow plows were they? They didn't have any. Nothing at all? They were just to step right into it? You had to try to get around the drifts. How about the town of Rockford in the wintertime around 1905, 1910? Did they have snow plows removed by hand then? No. Everything was done by hand, yeah. I faintly recall that they had built a snow plow for the main drags like 7th Street. It was just two planks together, and they had about six horses pulling them, and that would plow the snow off pretty well. But that was only on 7th Street. State Street wasn't much at all. How about fire protection on Rockford? You didn't have any fire protection, would you? No, that's for sure. The only fire protection we had was when we moved up there in Rock View, and they had that number 5 down there on 18th Avenue and 11th Street. That was drawn by horses, you know. So they had several stations then, some stations at that time. Yeah. They had that one there that I remember on was number 5, number 6 down by 7th Street and, let's see, that would be about 6th Street, I guess. I think the fire station is still there in the old building, and then the main fire station downtown, and that was drawn by horses, you know. When I got a little older, so I was eight, nine years old, and got moving around, I'd go down and visit. I'd go down there and watch them, you know. They had those harnesses hanging up just over the horses' back, and they triggered that, and they fell them down and – Slept them on. They slept them on, and it only took two, three minutes, and they were on their way. So those horses, they were standing there ready 24 hours a day? They had them in the back, and when the gong sounded, they opened the doors, and those horses ran out and got in place. They were trained, you know. They knew where they were going some place. I see. Yeah. So how many horses did they have in front of an engine? I seen that they had – Four? Well, the hook and ladder only had two horses, but the steamer that provided the pump had either three or four horses, because that was quite heavy. And I remember it was a beautiful nickel-plated, you know, and they polished that thing up. And they had a firebox in the bottom with a lot of fine shavings and wood. So the minute that gong sounded, they stuck a match to it, and that thing start burning, and by the time they got to the fire, they had pressure. Once in a while, I went to a fire where they didn't have enough pressure buildup. They had to wait till they got the pressure up so they could start the pump. And then, of course, meantime was to find a place where they could suck some water up. And I don't recall, but it seems to me they had a tanker with them also. But I remember the steamer and the hook and ladder, and I think they had a tanker that had some water with them, just like they do today, of course, see? And they were professional, and then they were on duty, both men and horses? Yeah. For four hours a day? Yeah. Was that kind of a privilege to belong to the firefighters? What? A privilege for a guy to work with them. Was that hard to get in there? Yeah. I know one fellow, one kid I associated with, well, it was the son to this London contractor. His name was Bertle. And he used to go down there and sit in those stations every day, all day long, and watch them. And he was going to be a fireman when he grew up. So when they were gone, if the horses dropped anything on the floor in there, he'd clean it up and have them all ready for them so when they come back in, you know, they didn't have to come back to a dirty place, see? Do you remember if they had a dog with them in the firehouse? No. No dog? No. You always see them in old pictures? Yeah. Well, I don't recall that they had any, no. Not in that one anyway. No. And at that time, they were all Swedes? Yeah. Most of them were, yeah. Because the politics were Swedish then? Yeah. Yeah. So they – I'd say any place you go on 7th Street and the stores or any place else, they spoke Swedish very clearly, you know. Which is number two. Yeah. And there was no problem with big fires in Rockford because you had the Kishwaukee and Rock River and everything. Pretty good water source. Yeah. I was trying to think if there was any big fires. I don't think – you see, people were more careful. Kids were not allowed to play with matches and cigarette lighters, you know. Anything like that. Mother and dad watched them. They couldn't get to those things. Now, mother and dad smoke and they throw the cigarette lighter and dab and pour by them or on the table and kids get a hold of it and go in a closet where they can't see them and set fire to things and that's what happens. Most of these fires you see – you hear about uptown kids playing with matches and playing with a lighter. Sure. There was a Christmas time though when you had the live candles in your Christmas tree. Was that the – We had – the first thing I can remember is we had a thing – we hung it from the ceiling and had probably about two or three dozen candles on them. Live candles? Yeah. And then there was tissue paper that we had, you know, made frilly and cut into all kinds of things and hung on there and candies and cookies and so on. And I remember one time one of those things caught fire and boy, dad opened the door and threw the whole thing out. So they was hanging in the ceiling? Yeah. Right from the ceiling, yeah. Was there a reason for not being touched by anybody on the floor? Well, so that the kids couldn't get into it, I guess. Yeah. And there was a tree, Christmas tree? No, it's not a tree. It was – we call them a krona. A Juskrona? Yeah. But it had – it hung from a peg, you know, or a hook. And then the main stock and then there was a row of lights and then a row of candles and another one. So you could buy them in any size from, I imagine, six or eight candles up to two dozen or three dozen candles. So you could buy those things in the stores? Yeah. And you could light those with a match, you know, and then watch them so that it didn't get fired to the structure itself because that was – they'd wrap paper around that, you know, and I don't know how they dared do it, but they did. So they didn't have any fire retardant material at the time? No. How about the Christmas tree? Did you also have that on the – We had years later on, but then I was about 13, 14 years old before we got a real Christmas tree. Oh, you didn't have it before that time? Uh-uh. No. No. So you moved in closer to town then in Rockview, you said? Yeah. Rockview on 18th Avenue, yeah. And he bought that house and got a loan from Freeport Bank? Yeah. And paid the loan $50 down. And that was around 1912? 1910, 11, 12? Yeah, it was before that, I guess, let's see, 19 – two, five, eight, yeah, I guess I was about 10 or 12 years old, yeah. How were the schools now? Do you remember anything – did you have an easy time in school? I mean, you liked the school work? Yeah, I liked it. I liked to play most, but you know – Play hockey, huh? No, no. I only skipped school one day, and it was a beautiful day in spring, and I skipped school. I don't know how I got by with it. It was nap, noon only, of course. So the teacher will notice that somebody was out there, and they told the parents about it? I tell you, we had to walk from 18th Avenue up there in Rockview, you know, to the school up there on John Nelson, up on Charles Street. And of course, I had gotten into the kids, and I wanted to play football and basketball and all that, you know, and football and baseball. And of course, teachers then were very much – they were pretty cognizant of what the kids did, you know, and how they reacted and so forth. And they made us go home for lunch. And we could only bring our lunch if it was over a foot of snow or raining real bad when we left home. We could bring our lunch. Otherwise, we could not bring our lunch. We had to go home. Why couldn't you do that? I mean, it was easier to bring all the kids together. Oh, we had to have exercise, see? Well, there was no reason. Oh, yeah. She says, you need to exercise. And I can remember when I got a little older, 12, 14 years old, well, yeah, I was about 14, I guess, I tried to sneak my lunch down. So we took our lunch with us, and we buried – we hid that in a culvert. And I rolled a big stone up against it, see? But it didn't fool the principal. She saw me out there with the rest.