 This is cassette two, side one, continuation with Anna Landström, cassette two, side one. So, there was never a thought of relocating the church after the Swedes moved out from there? Because they moved in so many different directions. No, no, that church was built in 1940, for Pete's sake. It was the same as this house, then? That's a new church for Pete's sake. No, no. Before, I think, 1919 or something like that, people had a church on Beneteau, a little wooden church. You remember that church? No, I don't. I said, my sister, I mustn't tell them, my sister, she used to go to that church all the time. And they had the Swedish services there all the time. And the Swedish pastors, you know. What about the Salvation Army? They work downtown? Oh, yeah. Oh, that's a nice organization. That's when I support the Salvation Army twice a year. I send them money. And I think they are doing good for all the people, and for kids who need help, you know. I think that's a nice organization. Really, I don't believe in all kinds of people who run around and ask for stuff, because I think most of it is used for themselves. But the Salvation Army is not. The Salvation Army helps out a lot. Because I have found that out in my work, among people, you know, that they help out where they are needed. How do you get time off to work with so many? You have all those different citations you receive for cancer society, and Luton Home, various groups. How do you get time to schedule up every day and every week? Why not? That's easy. You go when you need it. Do they come and ask you, or did you go and ask them if you could do something? No, no, no. I know what I'm assigned to do, you know, and I go when it's my turn to do it, you know. And then other people take part in something else, and, you know, that's no problem. But, I mean, how do you get in contact with them at the first time? Do you ask to do something, or do they ask you? No, I ask them, you know. I can be of help, you know, of course, if I can do something, you know. And, of course, working for Luther Haven, of course, we went there as volunteers a long, long time ago, 15 years ago. And we found out from the church that you needed volunteer workers to go down there and help out, you know. So that's when we signed up just to go. Sure, that's how you do it. And as far as working on the street, you know, for the March of Dimes, you know, that's you are signed up to decal. You do that to... Oh, yeah. They called me, and they asked me, would I go in one block, you know, to another house, houses, like, both sides, you know, go in one block. And one year I collected, and when I turned in what I had collected, he looked at me, and he said, in one block I had got in over $100 in one block, but one lady gave me $25, and one lady gave me $20, and another one $10, because I told them. I said, well, I said, we people, we are lucky. We can do this. I said, look at those poor little kids that we are helping, and I told them about March of Dimes and everything. They went into the other room, they come and gave me a check. But that isn't hard work, you know. To me, that's just... Well, of course, maybe I am different. I like... I don't mind to go in. I don't ask for myself, you see. That's what I like about... Best of all is because I don't want anything for myself. I used to do it because I know then inside myself, well, I help somebody. And to me, that's worth more than money. I don't need nothing. No, I am satisfied with what I have. You have been blessed with good health. Very good health. The only time I had a trouble was when I was really young, you know, when I had a trouble with, you know, my spine, you know. I had a, you know, very, very bad pain in my spine, you know. And the doctors called it a slipped disc. And they said... I went to one of those doctors, you know, and he said, well, he said, I tell you, in this country, we are not allowed to cut that nerve. But in Sweden, they are allowed to do it. If I was you, I'd go there and have it done. Otherwise, in 10 years, you'd be a complete cripple. They couldn't do it over here? They couldn't do it, not when I had it done. I don't know about now, but that's a long time ago, you know. So what did you do then? So then I come home, and I told my husband, he went down right away and asked for tickets, you know, to go over there. And we got a plane, of course, and went over there. And we went to his hometown, which had a big hospital, you know. And we went up there right away. And I had been screaming and crying for six months, you know. I couldn't lay down, you see. I had to sit, you know. And I went up there, you know, and my husband explained to them how it was. And, of course, I had a whole big, you know, letter from the doctor, from this, you know, not a chiropractor, but an orthopedic doctor, you know. And he told them exactly my case, how it was. And they took that in and studied, and they said, come back tomorrow morning. And that next morning, I went. And, you know, after I had been on the operating table, and after they put me back in bed, I couldn't believe it. I could breathe, you know. The pain was gone, completely gone. It was completely gone. Then I had to stay there for nine days, you know, until he had a back sort of a... I guess he probably put some cast on or something for a few days. But anyway, I have never, never, never in all those years, and it was way back. You know, my husband was living and everything. I was really young. So I have never in my life had a pain in the back since. Just imagine if I hadn't done what that orthopedic doctor said, I would have been sitting there or been dead. Because you couldn't live in that pain. You cannot live in that pain. A slipped disc is the worst pain there is in the whole spine. Do you know how it happened? It came by itself. Didn't know nothing. You didn't let anything happen to you? No. And the orthopedic doctor, he says, well, he said, maybe you have strain in your back a lot because you have been a childhood walker and you have been walked, you know, hard, you know, all your life, and maybe that's your part of it, you know. But we don't know, he said, because we can't explain it. But that doctor there, he was an orthopedic surgeon, and he was the one that sent me. And when I come back, the doctor said, send from Sweden a note or letter to him, but he had an answer. And then I went to him and talked to him, and I said, I can never, never in my life thank you enough for what you've done. Why couldn't they do it over here? It was against the law in those days. Against the law? He said it's against the law to cut the spinal nerve. Yeah, but is it better to have a person crippled? Well, that's what he answered me. He couldn't do it because, and then a few years after, you know, I found out about a Finnish woman who lives there, and she had the same trouble, and she went, this doctor there, he died, of course, all good doctors die. Anyway, she went to her doctor, and he said, well, he said, you got to go to the hospital, we got to cut the nerve. So now they can do it, but they couldn't do it way back then in 1920, 25, 30. They couldn't do it, and it was against the law here. So now they do it. But... And you never had any after the war? Never, and I have stronger legs without any veins or nothing. Look at that. And you exercise every day? You don't, I mean, yes, I do. I walk, and I have an exercise machine in my Swedish room, and I do push-ups, and I do, you know, all kind of... Push-ups too, and... I do all kind of, you know, for your chest and breast and everything. I tell you, you can do a lot for your body, but if you sit in a chair and look at that dumb thing there. I am not a television person, because I... But you eat right also? I eat right, that's the main thing. You got to eat right. You got to have protein, you got to have fruit, you got to have vegetables, you got to have milk. Milk is very important, because you see, you got to have calcium in your body. You drink skim milk then? Yes, I have two glasses a day, which is very, very healthy food for you, as far as calcium. I have cereals. I have oatmeal with raisins, and I have also, you know, regular cold cereal, you know, like a total or something with little protein in it. And then I don't eat beef or pork. I eat chicken or veal or fish. I never fry anything, because frying is absolutely no good for a person. So I either boil it or just boil it. And I boil it, you know, I do most of the time, because I have a small little oven, you know. Anyway, and that's good food, and they don't put fat or weight on you, but they keep you strong. But you got to have a lot of vegetables, fresh vegetables, not canned. Canned vegetables no good. Fresh vegetables, you know, and don't put any on it either. I put parsley, no bother. And no fried potatoes? No way. I bake my potatoes. I'm not Swedish anymore, I'm American. Anyway... So you are turned away from the smorgasbord, actually? I don't eat any of that food, except I eat... Köpuna de gott då? Oh, they are delicious. They are absolutely... But they are fried though, I mean, whenever you do it. You know, when I do a lot of it, like I do now for big doings, like we used to have, you know. Then I put, you know, I have big, you know, regular ovens in the kitchen there, you know. Like they have in the restaurants, you know, big ovens. So I used to put the big sheets of meatballs right on them and put them in the oven, you know. And they brown like this, and you know, you don't fry them. But anyway, we did fry them now for this, when we had that. But I saw that they were not burned or anything. They were just little, and then I put them in the oven, see to finish them. Because you don't have to fry them till they get brown. Are those kitchens used now in the churches, you know, in the 50s? A lot of kitchens were made proficient, just like a restaurant. Right about... But do the young people... Have you seen our kitchen? You know, no chairs on there. You didn't see the big chairs. Are the young people using it? Everybody's using it. Black and white and green and everybody. They are there all the time, and cooking, but they have most of that stuff, like that... The frying stuff? But when you see the people now, not particularly this neighborhood, but I see in other neighborhoods I go by, they are all so heavy, you know, they're always like 200, 300 pounds, and big butts and everything. I saw. They must be wrong diet. They eat the wrong food. They eat those sparrows, they eat fat pork, you know, that... And hamburgers. And hamburgers. If you don't make your own hamburgers, don't eat them. Because if you want a hamburger, you've got to buy a round steak, and you can't buy the ground round steak. You buy a round steak, cut out the feet, grind it yourself, you don't have no fat. But every hamburger that you eat outside, anyway, that's just fat. Fat and little meat, of course. Well, that you can have too. I don't go to fast eating places like that, like McDonald's and all those, because to me that isn't worth it. Because God gave us only one life to live, and God has told you to take care of yourself and your body, and if you don't do it, who's going to do it? Nobody. You are going to do it if it's going to be anything worthwhile, and I do it. I don't care what people say. Of course, I don't listen to what some people say. Well, why don't you want to do that and have that? I mean, eat that and have that. I said, well, you live your life, I live mine. We don't want to fight about anything. I have a woman who belonged to my guild down there, and she is that kind of a person. They're going to have lots of rich, fat food, you know. And, well, that shows too. So it's not good to be wealthy either to be able to afford to eat. No way. But you are happy, healthy, and a hard worker, but no pain. In other words, the only set of sex you get is to do the work. That's absolutely the truth. You are washing 20 heads a day here. Not the head. I said I do it once a month. Once a month, OK. In Luther Haven. In Luther Haven, yeah. And that is no problem, because there are two other women who sets it and comb it out. I do the washing because that's more difficult. You don't want it. But that's fun. Not fun, but I mean that's fulfillment. Because after I have done it, I always feel, well, why should I sit in my home? I have a nice home. I have a bedroom upstairs. I have a big house. I have a big recreation room. Why should I sit down and feel sorry for myself when I can do things for other people? Would you do that? You wouldn't. No. I wouldn't do it either. Your son, though, he was the oldest child. He was my oldest boy, yes. And he died young. He died young because, like I said, he was one of those people who would never, never get married. He just wanted to study and study and study, you know. And when he was 18 years old, he went to that Korean War. Right on his 18th birthday, they took him. And then he was military police because he was a big 6'4", you know, a big boy. Anyway, when he come back, you know, right away, you know, he was there for, I think he had to be there for a year then or something like that. Well, anyway, when he come back, you know, he went to Lansing to Michigan State College, you know. And he went to go there first, you know. And then he went to the colleges that's around here in Detroit, you know. All those colleges, he took one, after the colleges, he took one year course, you know. He went to Carnegie Hall, you know, and he went to all those places that you have around here. And he had more diplomas from all those colleges and everything like that. And he was studying continuously. And he said, when I be 30 years old, I marry, but not before I got to have all this schooling in. He lived for going to school. And he was smarter than heck. You know, every, you know, he come home and show him the diploma. Every one was A and B, A and B and everything, you know. And I tell you, I know when he went away in university, you know, he went there for a year, you know. And when he come home, you know, at night, you know, he lived home, you know, except when he was in Lansing. And he come home and he says, oh, he said, did I learn a lot today. He was through with all his schooling. He got a wonderful job, you know, and he was going to have, get married and everything. And now he died. So what can you do? And he had his physical only a few days before? Three days before he had it. And it was the doctor scheme. He said, Mom, he was very close to me because when my husband died, you know, he, if I hadn't had him and my daughter, I would have died, you know. But he was, he said, Mom, don't you worry. I'm going to take over everything. I'm going to see so you, you know, your income tax is taken care of and everything is taken care of. And, you know, I teach you everything, but you need to know about running a home like your dad, like daddy. Well, he did so too. But when he told me, he said, I got a clean bill of health, he said, so now I'm going to tell those people who have been after me, you know, that I take the job and that I'll be, then I'll be getting married too. He said because he had a wonderful girl that he had gone with for years, you know. Anyway, three days after he, like I told you, he died. Heart attack. Heart attack. Right there, heart attack. So I asked the doctors afterwards, you know, when I get back so I could talk. I said, why is it that a young person like that had a clean bill of health? He said, well, he said, he had a clean bill of health, and he said, but we don't know when the heart's going to stop. They don't tell us. Nothing in the medical knowledge knows when the heart's going to stop. He said he probably was under stress, you know, terrible stress, you know, he probably was under stress, you know, and he wanted to reach his goal, you know, and all that stuff, and that is the pressure on the heart. So, who knows? No, you can't do it. And that's what I say when I say to my prayer in the evening, I used to end it like this, I say, thank you for being my best friend, someone I can talk to every day, and that's what I feel God is to me. He is my best friend, and I can talk to him, and I do. When I say my prayer, I tell him things, and inside I feel like he hear me. But then when your husband left now, and then your son, didn't you feel left out? In other words, did you get down a little? Oh yeah, I tell you, I felt like it was very unfair. I didn't think I deserved it. I served all day, and I thought, well, why do I have it? So, then Pastor Truitt, he says, well, he said, Anna, it's a meaning for everything. Maybe now you are going to be doing something, you know, that's going to fulfill your life, he said. Maybe things are going to be better for you, so he said, we have to take one day as it comes. He said, we can't do much. He was also a very good person to talk to, you know, and to help. I never forget that night, you know, when my little granddaughter was over here because we were going to go to a church picnic, which we had in those days. Now we don't have it anymore because unaccounted. He won't let some of them in, you know, how it is. Anyway, we were going to go to a place that's called Stony Park, you know, and I had made all the food that day, and I had got everything ready. And then, all of a sudden, we were sitting there, it was around 9 o'clock, and I said, we better go to bed now, we got to get up so early. Then the doorbell in the back door rang, and here was Pastor Truitt standing with my sister and my nephew. I said, what are you doing so late at night? I'm going to go to bed. We are going to go on a picnic tomorrow. And the pastor said, Anna, can I talk to you? He opened the door, so I opened the door, and he came in, and he sat down there, and he said, Roy died tonight. Yeah. It was a hard blow. Sure it was. Never forget that night. And then, he died the 6th of August. The 6th of August was the day, you know, when I never, never, no matter how long I never stay home on the 6th of August, I always go out to my daughter, so I can be with her, you know, on that day, because it brings back, you know, everything that happened. But, like I said, life has to go on. I can't do anything. I can't change a thing. So, do the best you can, and then I hope we meet in heaven. And your daughter now, is she married? She's married and has three wonderful children. Those children are so close to me. Whom did she marry? A Swiss? She didn't marry a Swiss. She married one who was part Irish and part German, you know, and he has really a good job, too. He works for Chrysler, you know. He is a pattern maker, you know, and also a counseling for all kind of stuff. So, he has a good job, and one boy, he's graduated from college, you know, and the other one is going to graduate in five months, you know, another son. And the daughter, she married and she moved up to, way up to Traverse City. And she married a guy that she met in Detroit, but he didn't want to live in Detroit, so he told her, if you want to get married to me, you've got to move to Traverse City, because that's where my family is, my parents and my friends and my sisters and brothers and everything. So, they got married and they moved up there, you know, and she has a little girl now that's two years old. And, well, it's nice that they live on four acres of land, but my goodness, in the wintertime, it's lonely. There is nobody there. There's only gravel roads, you know. She said it's very lonely in the winter, but she maybe have to get used to it. She doesn't come home to Detroit quite often, because it's only about five hours ride, you know. She drives over with the girls, they are her parents. So, it takes five hours up to Traverse City. Oh, yeah. I've been up there several times with my daughter to see her Linda, you know, and that's what it takes us, you know. Probably once, you know, and see if there's need gas or something, but otherwise go right through. Then, when you come up there, it seems so funny, because there's no houses around. Out in the wilderness. So, you went back to Sweden the first time after you came here? 1930, I went back. 1930? Only for a visit. You were not in intention to stay? Never. Never. Never? Never. After I had been only for about, I would say, three or four months, I fell in love with Detroit and with up there in Blomfield Hills, you know. I wouldn't go back, no. I thought it was beautiful. After I started, you know, get my work. But, you see, I was used to work since I was 14 years old, and I didn't want to sit with my sister or with anybody, you know, because I want to work. And I was lucky to get that job. You know why I got a job? Because the girl who done my work, she got married and moved out. Otherwise, probably I would never get that. But, you see, the one person, my sister's friend, she was working there, see. So, she said, has a place for somebody now, because she had moved. So, I told my sister, let me get that job, let me get that job, I want to work. So, they took me in. So, that's how I started to work. So, when you came back to 1930 to Sweden, there was nothing that you could... There was nothing. I didn't want to stay there, but I thought it was nice. I could see my mother and father, they were living there, you know, and his parents, you know. And your sisters. My sisters, you know, and my brother, everybody I could visit, it was nice. But as far as I want to stay there, I never had that. It was a bad time here or was it bad? Very bad, because that was the present days, you know. People hardly didn't tell me. My husband never was out of work one day, never once. He worked, he was never out of work once. You went home only for three months? Not that long, two months. Two months, yeah. Oh, yeah. And then the second time when we went over there, then we went for six weeks, you know. And the third time, you know, a little less and less, when he had vacation, you see, we went, you see. And so, that was nice. And we brought cars with us. And boy, oh boy, when we brought those big American cars over there, people, they stand and looked at it and they couldn't believe anything so big, you know. Like we had a big white Mercury car, you know, under us with us. Did you leave it in Sweden when you took it back? No, we took them back. Back. Oh, yeah. We had them wait on the boat, you know, and then, you know, when we went back, we had back. Then we come to New York, we drove home, see. Mm-hmm. No, that was nice days. Well, of course, you were so young and you know, everything was fun, no matter what. I remember when we went to Disney World. No, not Disney World, to California there. And we went to see that Fisherman's Ward. And we thought, oh my gosh, how nice it is. We entered the hotel and we were going to stay there and we never hardly stayed in the hotel. We were out looking at everything. Everything was so new, you know. I know it was so nice. Then we went to Florida one time and we saw places where we never saw before. And of course, my husband loved the Northern Michigan, way up in the Upper Peninsula. And after he got his three-week vacation, you know, we packed the kids and we had a tent and we went way up to that Upper Peninsula and stayed for three weeks. That was another thing that was so beautiful. Everything was different. We lived in a completely different world than we live in today. Today is not like that. Although I still say, this Northeast area of Detroit is a nice place to live in. It's very nice and quiet and, you know, one kind of people so far, but we never knew. You see, why people don't move is because we have a Catholic church three blocks from here. And all the young people across the street are Catholics and they send their children there. And then there's a Catholic high school for girls. So nobody moves until kids are through high school. It keeps the neighborhood intact. Yeah, it keeps them there. And as long as nobody moved, there wouldn't be no houses for sale. You know that. So, because I have talked to all of them and he says, no, that's why we bought the house here because we want to be close to St. Matthew's Church, you know, because three of them are principals down there, you know, who lives here. And school teachers, you know, so naturally they don't want to move. So black people don't move in here? Not in this area, but further down there, you know, but our houses for sale, as soon as the house for sale, they sell them to black. Oh, yes, sell them to black. And up here, see, I live between Yorkshire and Whittier, you see, and down on the other side of where Alice lived there, you know, she had blacks on both sides and blacks across the street. And that area, people start to move out and then the black comes in. But as long as nobody moved. And the church is a stabilizing factor, in other words, that keeps the neighborhood intact? Absolutely, in this area. And I'm glad because I like to say people stay down, we have 50 kids here in the block, so it's a very happy, healthy block, you know, with young people and children, they are playing here in the evening and a little noisy, but that's all right. I don't complain about, they have those big wheels and they scream and holler for a couple hours, but that isn't too bad. Kids are kids. Yeah, it's, otherwise it's changing neighborhoods all over town. Oh, yeah, oh my goodness, down by the churches, I don't think that's a white person living. It's all black area now. Yeah. And I remember the first time I saw a black person, that was when I came to America. We had never, of course, in those days, we never knew there was black people. We thought there was many, you know, we learned in school, you know, but anyway, when I came to New York and I saw, when we got off the boat and we went in, I saw one. I stood like this and I stared at him and I could see his face, he started to smile and everything, and then somebody pushed, I said, he eats people. That's how innocent and young you are. But it didn't take me long to know that they were just like we are, only they had darker skin, you know. Little darker skin, so we used to call them sunburned Swedes. Yeah, oh well, you learn, as life goes on. But it is hard though for many Swedes to accept the colored people because don't you think there's a prejudice that... Oh, absolutely, absolutely. I don't think they feel at home with them at all, no, oh no. Because the color makes it different. Oh, yeah, only I can say that only second generation Swedes have, they don't accept, no. They don't? They don't want very much to do with them, you know. Well, can't do nothing. We live one day at a time and try to make the best of it, that's the way I feel.