 In school, you know, when they talked about history and things, the teacher always says, well, everybody that comes to the United States has to come through Ellis Island. Well, of course, you know, on the surface of it, that's silly because people that come from China or any other place, they come through the West Coast or they can come through New Orleans or you can come through all kinds of places. We came through Philadelphia. Now, the reason was that there were so many boats ahead of us that they didn't have enough food on the boat to keep feed us for three, four days. So they were told to go to Philadelphia, which is not very far away. And then, of course, we got right through. And then we went by train from Philadelphia to Chicago and from Chicago to Cambridge, well, Minneapolis, and then Cambridge, Minnesota. My mother had some relatives there and, of course, you had to have somebody to sponsor you. Yes, he was a smuggler in Sweden, so of course he was a smuggler. He wasn't a smuggler for very long. He took care of the big buildings. He was a superintendt. He already was, then? Yes. What was the reason, I imagine. You weren't more than a few months older. So you've been going through the classical music for 9 years? Yes, I've been in school for 2 years. But you know that people who have never gone through such a thing, when they come to a new country, they don't know a single word. So it took 2-3 years before it went well for me in school. I had to learn the language and how to spell the words. But I was very good at counting and stuff. I've always been good at that. So it went well. But still, school has gone well in this country. After I started learning the language and stuff. You mentioned the teacher talking about Ellis Island. Did you read American history or maybe a little about immigration? Not much. To show how much people in Sweden, especially children, knew about America. And those who were a little older, 12-13 years old, I thought. When you came to America, you could lie in the sun, eat oranges, fish and... So it was painted with beautiful colors? Yes, only beautiful colors. I've never heard of Minnesota. It took many years before I went... It took at least 15 years before I saw the place they were talking about. How many children were there in your family? I have a sister who is currently moving from Chicago. It's an Elmhurst, a suburb of Chicago, to Sun City, Arizona. They've both quit their jobs and are now going to live there. But it's just my sister who is here. So your parents took the step to emigrate. Do you remember what they were talking about? Yes, of course. Was it you who told them that America was better? I don't know. There was a lot of talk about America and how good everything was here. I have to say that we've had it good here. Your parents had no siblings? My father has a brother who came here a year after us. They lived in Montana. I have three cousins there. What was the name of your uncle? His name was Johansson. His name was Claes. But you didn't have anyone to come to Cambridge? Yes, my mother had an aunt. A mother-in-law? Yes, she was a mother-in-law. She was the sister of my grandfather. So we were there for a couple of weeks. But then we moved to a place. My father went to Minneapolis because there was no work there. Did they have a farm up there? Yes, they had seven children. Six brothers and one sister. So it was a big family and everyone had a farm. What was the name of the family? It was called Kihlström. So your father moved to the twin cities? Yes, he went down there alone first. But you know how hard it is. He couldn't speak a word of English. It was lucky that there were many Swedes who were in the construction industry. There was one from Bergsjö who was well known in Sweden. He had been here for many years. He liked this person and did the same in Sweden. He helped a lot to get work. My father was very good at work. He knew what to do. He was good all the time, even during the hard times in the 30s. Depression. So he lived in a room down there in Minneapolis? Yes, until he saw that there was work. Then we moved down there. Did you start school in Cambridge? In Ice Sandy. This farm was between Cambridge and Ice Sandy. When we moved from that big farm to a smaller place, Ice Sandy was closer. So I started school there. It was hard. There were no other Swedish children in the school? Yes, but not many could speak. Even older people could speak Swedish with English. And a little mix. So you had to learn the language, both English and Swedish-American? Yes, that's right. And many of the children from Dalarna lived in Cambridge? Yes, but there were also many from Helsingland. If someone had come, there were brothers and sisters. And more and more. Were they helpful? Yes, they were. But still, I don't complain about that. But it was hard. The language was the worst? Yes, the language was the worst. It was not that we didn't have food to eat. But your father couldn't speak Swedish in his work? Yes, a little. There were probably Swedes and Norwegians. But there were fewer of them. But it didn't take long before they could speak. Did your father go to the Lafton school? Yes, he did. Here in Minneapolis? Yes. We moved a lot. It was a big building. We could stay there for a couple of years. So there were many, many places. Where did you live when you moved? Here in Minneapolis? Yes. On the south side? No, on the north side. 617 Lowery Avenue North. I'll never forget that address. Was it a Swedish area? No. How did he get that address? I don't know. Was it a friend of yours? I don't know. So he didn't look for the Swedes where they lived? Yes, of course. But the Swedes didn't live in just one place. At that time? Yes, they were everywhere. There were many, many Swedes here. And there are still many, many, many. But most of them lived on the south side? Yes, everywhere. Not on the south side, north or south. They were everywhere. How did they get into a church when they came? Well, not at the time when we first moved here to Minneapolis. Because... I don't remember why, but it was in Cambridge. I went to Sunday school and stuff like that. In the Lutheran Church? Yes. And also here. But you know that in Sweden, even if you can speak a little Swedish, to hear someone preach in Swedish is a whole different thing. And it was the same here. They could read much better than they could speak. Especially my mother. She read everything in the newspapers. Everything. In the American press? Yes. So it was easier for her, I think. Much easier to read. But to read and write is a whole different thing than speaking. And for me, to read Swedish... If it's safe, then it's fine. But I've said it many times, I don't think anyone writes as badly as Swedish. So it's hard to get the right context? Very hard. And I have a lot of correspondence with Swedes. A lot. But I've been through so many things. Handwritten letters are hard to read? Yes. But if it's a typewriter? Yes, then it's much easier. And you know what it is you're talking about? Yes, no problem. So your mother read the Swedish-American press? Yes, she did. The Swedish Post and... Yes, they had to know about that. They had to know about it and figure out how it went in Sweden. But did they get any money from the English priest in the church? Not much. So they didn't care and it was sad? But there were many priests who preached in Swedish. And then everything went well. But that wasn't every Sunday? No, it was every Sunday. But they didn't have a car to start with, so it was a bit hard. What did you start with? Did you work after school? Yes, I did. No one worked more than me after school. How old were you when you started? I used to sell newspapers first, I remember. And......I used to polish shoes and stuff. So you came into the public life and learned English quickly? Yes, of course. It was only the first few years that were a bit hard. But after that it went very well. I've always been able to speak. Oh, you've been able to count? Yes, I've been very... You didn't sell newspapers and polish shoes, you always got a fair payment? Yes, I did. Both my parents were very good at knowing the value of money. So could you go to the store and trade? Yes, of course. There were many places where they preached in Swedish. In the stores? Was it in Swedish stores? If the store was big, they usually had one or two people who could speak Swedish. So it went well. But the association, you became very interested in it later on. Did your parents join in the Viking, Swedish... Yes, of course they did. There had never been a Viking here. Never. Where did they go? Switzerland and Vaasa. Vaasa was the biggest. And the Swedish Brotherhood, Scandinavian Fraternity? No, no. They didn't have a shareholder? No, not that I know of. And I must say that I don't think there's anyone in this town who knows more about Swedish organizations than I do. But your parents joined in an association? Yes, both of them. As soon as they moved to Minneapolis? After they moved here. There was no one in Cambridge. And then they went in with health insurance. That was the biggest reason? Yes, there wasn't that much health... But that was the only health insurance they had then? Yes, of course. Because dad didn't have any work? No, not a bit. So you lived on good health and luck? Yes, yes. You know, it wasn't like it was in Sweden. It took a long, long time. Roosevelt, when he was president, he started with social security. He sent people to Sweden to learn. Dad wasn't worried during the depression years? No, he was very good at his job. He knew what he was doing. He worked almost evenly. So he wasn't depressed? No, not much. Very little. Did they rent a house? Yes, they rented. What association did your dad join? He was in Switzerland. Was he in charge? Yes, but he was away so much that he couldn't do that. We lived here, even though he was in Galveston, Texas for two years. For a company in Minneapolis? Yes, they built a big hospital there. But then we moved to Kansas City, where they built a big post office. We moved there in 1931. Even then it costed 9 million. What was the name of the company he worked for? It was Ring Construction. So he joined the union. The union? Oh yes. In Sweden it was something else. He was a big part of the union? Yes, very strong. So his political view was to be a democrat? Yes, of course. And he stuck to that all his life? Yes. He didn't become a leader? No, I never did anything with how much money he had. So he had the opportunity to work with many non-Swedes, Irish and Italians. How did he find them? He was a boss most of the time. So he had to hire people? Yes. Do you think he hired Swedes because they were a leader? Yes, they could have been here. They were better workers? Yes, Swedes, Germans and Norwegians were much better than the rest. So they were a fad? The Swedes were very worthless. And they are still worthless today. I think it's only the Indians who are worse. They have a different attitude? What are they supposed to work for? The Indians get money from the state every month. Just because they are Indians. And it goes down so far that if you are an eighth of something... I know people who... I know a man named Liljeqvist. I think he is an eighth Indian. He gets some money, not because he needs it. But yes. I know that in Sweden they have heard how bad we have treated the Indians and the Swedes. There are more Indians today than there were 100 years ago. 200 years. In Minnesota? All over the country. There are more Indians today. You know, there was a big sport for slavery. And that's all they did. But they have also married other nationalities? No, not much. They are sticking to it? Yes, not much. The Negroes have done it more. I have nothing against the Indians. If they want to work like others, like we have to do. But not many do it. So the Northern Europeans have a favor when they come to the workplace and look for work? Yes. So he was not involved in the big strikes and such during that time? Because he was the leader, then he did not have to get involved in the union so much? No, but... He was in the cops then, of course. Yes, that was it. Did he get a pension when he quit his job? Yes, but not much. You know, this pension... He was born early? Yes, you know, he died in 1968. And it's the last 20 years that he has been very good at such work. But I work for the same company. Social Security started in 1936. So I have been with... Yes, since 1936. I worked a little earlier then. Because then I was 22. What kind of work did you get after school? Did you continue after high school and went to Caritz? Yes, but... I and my father built many houses. And I have built many houses by myself. So you became a carpenter too? Yes, not so much. I have built this house myself. And I have built houses on the other side of the street. But you were not a carpenter, so you did not join the union? No, no. I rented out the people who put in water pipes and electricity. I rented it out and heated it. But still... At the same time as I work for Kraft. But you also worked for your father's company for a while? Yes, not much. Yes, at first. What did you do? Then I left. But you did not join the union? Yes, because we were in Kansas City. Because it was a bigger state. But there were many places, many small towns. We built a courthouse in Redfield, South Dakota. And we went to New Ulm to build an auditorium. For the Catholic Church, I think. We went to Winona and built a school and an auditorium. Was it not worse for a company to come to a new place? And not have union members, for example, who were in the union? It was open to anyone. If we needed work, we would put up a sign. There were many places, you know, small towns. Those who had business, they never wanted to pay anyone. But my father said, we have taken it here, and we will pay you a day and an hour. Oh, that was a lot. Those who only did rough work, I do not remember if it was 60 cents. And the guy in the small town said, 25. And they were angry with him for paying too much. Because people... So your father had the opportunity to give the workers what they were worth? Sure, sure. So he called the construction and listened to what he said? Yes, because you know, when they calculated what they could build this for, they said, we will pay the workers 60 cents and cut it a day. Of course, if they had paid less. Yes, of course. But you know, if you have people who know what they are doing, it is much better to have such people than people who have to learn everything. But the union has gone down a little bit lately. They are the ones who do not defend so much. Yes, they have. But you know, in the southern part of the country they have never been strong. Never. And it is still the case today. I know a lot of people in Florida, because I have been there many years. But, yes, some people make so little money that it is a shame. Because they are so good at their work that they can pay how much they want. Even if it is not. So they do not pay more than they should? Yes. Even today, a carpenter here, I think he makes between 10-13 dollars an hour. You can get the best for 5 dollars. In Florida? Yes. Yes, when they built the Disney World, they had to have so much population, so they announced that they would pay 5 dollars an hour for a carpenter. And that was 20 years ago. 15 or 20? 15 or 20 years ago. Yes, you know, 2.5. That was what started to get up to 5. Because everyone who knew something, they went there. Yes, those who built homes and such, they did not have any. So they had to pay more. And it has never gone down, but it has never gone up either. Even though we have had so much inflation afterwards. So it is a place that the unions can not do much about. Yes. And the other unions, for example, Rörmokar and Målar? Yes, they are... Are they loyal to the carpenters, for example, if you have a bad payment? Yes, the payment is almost the same. It's low there too? Yes, it's low. Målar, you can get the best, best, best for 5. So you got another job as a salesman for crayfish? Sure. Yes, because Fah said that this is just animal plunder. So he does not recommend... So he said, if you can start doing something else, and that was good. I got a good pension from them. They had a union too? Yes, we had that too. You were organized? Yes, but the truck drivers had... So dad, he does not recommend the construction industry for you? Yes, you know, during the war, the materials were bad, because the government took it all. And only jobs that were government sponsored. My dad built a lot of the airport, because it was government sponsored. They had all the stuff they wanted. But even after the war, two years, and I was gone two years, I spent two years in the Arctic during the war. So you were called in to... I was in the Corps of Engineers, and we built air bases. We were in Churchill, Manitoba first, and we went to what they call Baffin Land, which is well above the Arctic Circle. That was good stuff, I must say. It was. The cooling or... Oh, yes, yes. 60, 70 below zero. And blowing wind constantly. What did you do then? What exercises did you do? It was so cold. The Indians, Eskimos, they were not tough enough to be out. Ten hours a day. We built barracks. We had a town, built a town that could take care of 5,000 people. And when you build a town for 5,000 people, you're talking about a water system. Well, of course, you can't drill and get water. It's perpetual frost. You have to melt snow and ice. Cut ice and melt it. And you have to have something, some sanitary system. We built two churches there. Churches, too? Churches, you bet. Movie theaters, well, 5,000 people. Living accommodations, barracks. So they had families with them? No, no, no, no. Only for men? Only for men. And barracks, we had laundry, steam baths, saunas, kitchen facilities, cooking facilities, big mess halls, eating halls. That was a big town. Airport, runways. Did they have modern insulation at that time to defrost? Yeah, what they used was really very good. It's called chemical, all made out of paper. Paper is a good insulator. And the reason it's not been very popular here is because it— Moisture? Not only moisture, but fire. It's a fire hazard. In the last few years, I was involved with an outfit that made, not actively, but I had some money in it. I had enough experience with paper insulation, but then we had to apply some fire retardant material. The people that did that real good and were real conscientious about doing it, their products were good. But then there was enough people that got involved for a quick buck, you know. And so it wasn't—it didn't— Then you have—then you got the other more modern, which has taken over. Styrofoam. Yeah. And—oh, I don't know if it's any better, but it has some advantages that these others didn't. So then you came back to Minneapolis after the war? Oh, yeah. Then I went to work for Kraft. Kraft. And that was continuously. And when did you start to get involved now with the organization? About 40 years ago. Forty years ago. And were you together with your family in Sweden, for instance, as a member? For a little while. Well, no, for quite a long while. But then my dad—you see, Svenskarnas Dog— Svenskarnas Dog is made up of— Well, we used to have about 40 Swedish cultural and fraternal and provincial societies. Every province—all landskap hade ju sin egen. And each one was, at that time, allowed to send two people to a central committee. Was that early 40s or late 30s? Well, no, that was—well, they were— But this—no, it was old even before that, even before the Depression. Oh, yeah, in the 20s. In fact, you take during the 30s, there were more organizations because there were more newcomers. But even—Blackie, even since I became active, we had 42 at one time organizations that belonged to Svenskarnas Dog. And each one of them was entitled to send two people to this central committee. And that central committee elected its own officers. And really, we were very successful. By far, by far, by far the biggest nationality organization in the country. We've had some fantastic— Well, see, we're now this coming year— I don't know, have you ever seen any of our program books? This coming year now—see, it's always the fourth Sunday in June. Well, this year, 86, it was on the 22nd. See, that's as early as it can be and be the fourth Sunday. You tried to coincide with Midsummer then? Right, right, right, always. Well, next year now, it'll be the 28th. That's the latest it can be, see? Four times seven is 28, and it's the fourth Sunday. And 22nd is the earliest it can be because three times seven is 21, and then it happens that this year there were five Sundays, which doesn't happen very often. But anyhow, so then, oh, my dad said, because he was—oh, he had been a delegate for some time, and he said, why don't you take my place? He said, I'll see if I can arrange it so you can take my place. You representing Switzerland? No, I represented Helsinki. So when did you become a member of the Helsinki— Oh, I had been a member for some time, yeah. Did you enjoy going then to those meetings? Oh, yeah, I enjoyed—well, I did it—I really did it more for my mother and father. Did they have the gatherings in Swedish or—? Always in Swedish. Always in Swedish? Always—not anymore, but they always did. Not anymore. But then, so I became a delegate to Svenskinesdag, and I knew quite a few people because I had been very active. Oh, I had been very active politically, and so I knew quite a few people when I got there. Well, and it's funny. If you can—a lot of people don't like to get involved themselves to a point where it takes a lot of time. So, gee, I think after I had been a delegate for three or four months, I was delegate in the spring three or four months. How often did you meet then? Oh, every month. Once a month? Once a month. And now we meet the third Monday of every month. And so then, oh, I don't know, March or April maybe, and then Svenskinesdag, and then, of course, there was no meeting in July or August. But then September came along, and so there were several people that I knew quite well because I didn't have many other obligations. So I worked hard for Svenskinesdag. So as a representative now for Helsinki, what was your input into it? What did you have to say? What did you recommend? Well, I've never been very shy about recommendation if I felt that I had a good thought to. And they were mostly quite elderly people. In the leadership? Yeah, all very, very elderly. Did you at that time feel a little bit out of place? No, no, not a bit because I had so much experience. I had so—I had been a—see, when I was 21, I was elected to the city council in Minnetonka. So I served there for 36— You lived all around here then? Yeah, I was elected in 36. Well, then I served for six years. Well, then, of course, the war came along. As a Democrat then? No, not—no, no, no. I was nonpartisan. There was no party politics then as far as that council was concerned. Although I had the support of—I certainly had the support of the—then it was the Farmer Labor Party, which Hubert Humphrey was instrumental in joining the Democratic Party and the Farmer Labor Party. How did they go around with the city people? I mean, to belong to the Farmer Labor Party, didn't they? No, most of the city, most of the city. To belong to the Farmer Labor Party? Oh, sure. But could they associate with that kind of environment? Oh, no. Oh, sure. Oh, sure. There was no— Oh, no, there was some great—some of the greatest people we've ever had in the state were Farmer Laborites. Floyd B. Olson was probably the greatest governor that the state ever had. He was an attorney. He was a county attorney for a while. But did you get the support of the businessmen, though? Oh, some of them. Some of them. Oh, some of them. Some of them were Farmer Laborites. Because labor was a bad word for the management. Yeah, but it wasn't—it wasn't quite that bad. Now you get that conception more than ever. So at that time, there was not— Well, there was some, of course. Oh, yeah. There was some. There was some. Always—there have always been people who were very— They wanted labor to get nothing. They should be delighted to have the opportunity to get a crust of bread, you know, this type of feeling. It was even the same in Sweden, you know. I remember two big strikes as a kid in Sweden at the paper pulp in Esvik. I think one strike—well, that was just before. It must have been about eight. I remember one when I was six, one in eight, and the last one lasted a long time. My dad was very active in the union there. Was he a socialist? No. Well, I don't know. They were liberal. They were liberals. I don't know what they called themselves. I know they weren't communists because—I suppose they were socialists. I suppose. But here they— But— —an equal sign for both of them. I mean, if you're a Democrat or a socialist, that's use— Well, that used to be more so than now. People are smarter now. There are a lot of professional people that are Democrats. Well, look at the landslide victory that we've had here, all over the country. It's evident that people are sick and tired of these ultra-conservatives. They're waking up. They're waking up. That's right. Paul, did you see any difference between your philosophy and your father's, for instance? No, no. No. No? No. None whatsoever. I've always been a liberal. I always feel that—and I always kind of—with tongue in cheek, I usually tell these— Nobody gets after me very much about politics because they know that I'm very capable of defending my position, and I don't hesitate to do so. So you're well-read on the subject. So I feel that I'm better read than 99 percent of the people anyhow. But, you know, it gets to a point where I've done a lot of business with this bank here, a lot of personal business, and they're nice people. So when this Pete business came along, I saw that they handled our money. So they treat me like a long-lost brother all the time. Well, anyhow, but you can tell—I was in there the day after the election now, and certainly not for political purposes, but so they wanted the executive vice president that I really do most of my business with. And he said, well, I suppose you're happy today. Well, I said, not only am I happy, I said, you should be happy. And I started to give him a little lecture about when people make money, then they can patronize your bank. Yeah, he says, I guess you're right. But he happened to vote because he volunteered it several months back, a couple months back anyhow. He said, well, he said, I've never voted for a perpetrator before, but I said I'm going to do it this time because he said he is trying. He said he doesn't always succeed, but if you never try, you sure as hell aren't going to succeed. And this state is much better shaped now than it was four, five, six years ago. We had a Norwegian for a governor, Cui, who was absolutely worthless. Not because he was Norwegian, but it just happened. And I told him months ago, I said, well, us Swedes, we've adopted Rudy Perpich. So he is effective and aggressive in a way that pleases the people. The Swedes are, you know, there are more Germans in this state. There are more Norwegians in this state than there are Swedes. But we've, and I always say, well, hell, that's, but no matter where you go in this country, if you get involved in talking about nationalities in the state here, they say you're from Minnesota. Oh, yeah, that's where all the Swedes live. Well, that's what everybody feels. And I say, well, not all of them, but I said the only reason you think so is because we make more noise than all the rest of them, which is true. Hell, you know, we've had, well, God, you know, we've had Nixon here as principal speaker for Svansk and Havard. We had President Johnson here. We've had Chief Justice Warren. We've had just a lot of big internationally known people as speakers. Well, you know, they don't go to a family picnic. There were 100,000 people out there when Johnson was here. So it was okay then to interview politicians? Well, I always try. See, I've been involved for 40 years and really in a leadership position in all. I was chairman for 27 consecutive years. So really, you know, we were, in fact, when I took over, some of the old timers said, God, don't waste your time on, don't try to beat life into a dead horse, you know. What year did you come in on, 1940? Oh, Christ, I don't know. Yeah, it was in the 40s. After the war? After the, oh yes, after the war, sure. So your idea is now, how did you shoot them across the table? I mean, you were a little guy here, you were a newcomer. Didn't the old Swedes, they're sitting and thinking, you take your time? Yeah, no, but you see, by then, by then, I was fully grown, you know, and I had. Yeah, I know, but I mean, in the stature of being, representing the Swedish community, you were a beginner. Well, it doesn't take long. If you've got five cents worth of sense and you don't talk foolish, you know, and propose foolish things. But I was, I had been involved in politics then for quite a while, and I had learned, you know, if you want to learn how to get along publicly, that's what you should do, get involved in politics, because you soon, and I was always very cautious about, oh, saying things that would be construed as being way out of line, you know. I never, I was, I felt that I was smarter than that, and so it didn't take, in fact, as I say, when I became chair, first I was vice chairman for, well, five or six years, right, the first year that I was in there. You were elected in the... As vice chairman, and of course, and we had a guy then, we had a fellow by the name of, God, it's a damn long ago, Nels Salin. I would imagine he's dead by now. Yeah, he was for the American Swedish Institute. That's right, that's right, but that's a long time ago, a long time ago. And he was here for, he was here for, oh, I don't know, four or five years, I would think, about that. Well, then, see, they were so lacking, they were so lacking in leadership that could, first of all, leadership that could speak well, because most of them, hell, they were all immigrants. But he was not one of the people around here, though, I mean, he had to... No, well...... time to introduce himself. Yeah, but see, as director of the institute, that didn't take too long. So he was chairman for a while, oh, a couple of years. Then there was a fellow by the name, or just a gentleman in every respect, fellow by the name of Einer Hollenquist. He was chairman for two years once, and then a one-year term. He's a lawyer? No. He's related to him, though, isn't he? No. No? No relation? No. No, he was the first one here from Sweden, and he has a son and a couple of daughters, but no, no, Hollenquist. No, he's not, not related to any lawyer either. I know him very, very well. He was killed in Florida, some damn punk run into him and killed him outright. But then during those about five years, see, Hollenquist was chairman first a year, Salin too, Hollenquist too. That makes about five, and I was vice chairman under those five years. Well, then Salin, oh, he was a genuine bastard in every sense of the word. Oh, I could go on the rest of the day about that character. Was he too academic then for the group, or... No.... in what way... He was chairman, but you see, they weren't doing anything. It was nothing to be chairman then because they weren't doing anything. How big of a crowd did they attract during his time, for instance? I'd say, I don't know, five, six thousand people. But, well, then of course, I had some very good friends that, even when I first got involved. But then when I became chairman, they said, look, this thing is dying on the vine. You're either going to have to put in a lot of effort to get this thing recognized, otherwise it's going to die, and it's no great honor to be head of something that's dying. But you had five thousand people, or let us say, you know, ever since those years. In many places, there were only a couple of hundred coming, and they were still happy. That's what I say. We're by far the biggest. Have always been. So you always strive to be better every year then? Well, we strive. We aren't always successful. You know, you can't always get the president, you know. But, you know, under Sully and Hollenquist, did you have anything to say as a... Oh, absolutely. You could speak up. You not only could, I did. And, of course, because I have never been one to be very quiet. If, not just run off at the mouth, but I'm talking about when it was something that was just... Now Hollenquist was much better then Sully. Sully was a kind of a... Oh, he was a great egotist, and he thought that... But they never did anything different, see. Everything that we're doing today, I started. And I don't say that just... I don't blow my own horn very much, but fact to fact, we... So then we've had then, they started then in Minneapolis, the Aquitennial. Now you maybe have heard about that. So I said one, in one meeting, I said, Look, why aren't we involved in the Aquitennial? The biggest single city celebration in the year, and we don't belong. There are more Swedes in Minneapolis than anything else. And still, we're not involved. Well, we don't want to be... You know, they were so conservative. I don't mean politically, but just conservative minded. That they didn't want to... Oh, they didn't know whether they wanted to belong to that. But then finally some, some of my friends, and some of the more advanced thinkers, you know, they said, Einer, why don't you find out about that? So I did. Oh, they were delighted to have us. Because by then, you see, we were pretty well known. So they were delighted to have us involved. Is this a trait, you think, for the Swedish people? They don't want to put their foot forward. Absolutely. They like to come together, have a good time, but don't... Yeah, don't stir up the waters, and don't get... Don't stick your neck out. Right, absolutely. Absolutely. That's their biggest downfall. I love the Irish, because the Irish, boy, they're just the other way. They, in fact, I had so many of them that say, Jesus, you're not a typical Swede, you know. They usually kind of hang back and don't say much and don't, you know. But you took a lot of chances there. You see, all those 44 organizations or so, they have more or less in the constitutions and bylaws that don't mix any politics involved. No, no, we never mix politics. No, but I mean, when you invited Nixon, you know, and Humphrey. Oh, yeah, but listen, these are leaders. You can't, no, no, we never deny it. They always invited the governor. The governor, I understand. They've always done that. But I mean, at large meetings, there was... Oh, no, no....to speak politics. No, no, no, no. So they went a long way to invite... Oh, well, hell, they had always invited... You see, it wasn't that they were opposed to inviting people, but they didn't know how to do it. And they would say, well, I remember so well when I announced, I'm going to invite the chief justice, because he was, first he was a former governor of California, head of the, oh, several presidential commissions, chief justice, and several, fairly well educated, a couple of lawyers, oh, God, what are you going to waste your time? You're never going to get him. Do they feel bypassed then by your actions? Well, what they did feel was that, well, here, this young upstart, he's going to do this, and why the hell haven't we done it? In fact, when I'm sitting there, he says, God, he said, you're going to be stepping on toes. Well, I said, isn't that too God damn bad? I'll step on them harder. So, and you know, these people aren't untouchable. By then, I was a very good friend of Hubert Humphrey, and I always was, very good. Personal friend with him? Personal, very personal friend. I got a letter from him that was dated the day before he died. I knew Hubert Humphrey very, very, very well. Well, anyhow, so, well, then when I, of course, that became a challenge then, see, when they said, oh, hell, you can't get the chief justice. What are you talking about? You know, he's not going to come to Svenskronstrand. Well, I said, does it hurt to try? Well, no, of course, you don't want to waste your time. You know, well, I said, okay. Well, we had him. But it showed the power that Humphrey had. I wrote a letter to the chief justice and explained the whole bit to him. And, and so I got a letter back in a couple of weeks. I said, gee, he said, I'm sorry, because he was Swedish, you know. He said, I'm sorry, I'd love to come to Svenskronstrand, but he said, I do have a prior commitment. And unless I can break that, or unless something happens so that I cannot go to that, he said, I, I, so he said, I would suggest that you try getting somebody else, you know. And I just felt that it was, it was too soon, too glib, too easy to say no. So I called Humphrey, and I said, look, I know that you know the chief justice. I've invited him, and he's turned me down. And I said, I just don't think it's a legitimate refusal. All right, he says, I'll see what I can do. And then, of course, I said, and when, when he comes, I want you to be there to introduce him. Well, you know, you can't do any less than that. When a guy goes out and gets a speaker of that caliber for you, you've got to, somebody's got to introduce him. And what the hell, it doesn't mean anything to me. About two weeks after that, I got a letter from the chief justice, and he said, you know, when I, in my letter of whatever the date was, I told you that I just couldn't come, something has come up, that I'm not going to be required to go to this other doing. And he said, if you still want me, I'll be delighted to be there. Well, Jesus Christ, you can imagine, especially the legal community, you know. And we had a couple lawyers. One in particular, I've been involved with so goddamn many people that I have a hard time sometimes remembering the names of all of them. How did they get the news, though? Oh, well. For events of the Svenskarnasdag? Oh, yes, oh, yeah, see this. This spread out. Well, this fellow's name was Walfred Peterson, a nice fellow, he was an attorney, an immigrant. But he thought he was, he was one of what we called bette de svenska. And, you know, you think back. See, I was going to be a lawyer. In fact, I went to law school. But at the same time, I was on the city council in Minnetonka, and we had a couple lawyers on the relief. Yeah, we did. We had a dentist on relief. These were tough times. See, in 1936 I was elected. And the more I thought about it, and I had a real good friend that was our city attorney. Fell by the name of Alan Johnson. So, I don't know, we were talking one day, and he says, how are you doing in law school? I said, pretty good. God, he said, you know, he said, I've got a son that's coming up, and he said, I'm going to advise him not to become involved in the legal profession.