 Hult. Hultsocken. Yeah. And his folks were some kind of military guys, you know. So that was a pretty good-sized farm, that slattefall, you know. And my dad's brothers, they took care of the farm after his dad died, you know. And then he decided to come over to this country, so he was over here for I don't know just how many years it was. So then him and another fellow, with name of Ring, they went up in North Dakota and bought some land from the government. I guess they paid a dollar an acre or so, as long as I, that's my recollection anyhow from what he was telling, you know. So this was homestead land then? Yeah. Homesteading? Yeah. So they built a little place where they could have a cow, you know, and stuff. And then in the spring, they brought up horses from the south, maybe two, three hundred, you know, between the farmers up there. And then they broke them in, you know, and then when they started to get the harvest done, you know, they started out in the morning, team after team, you know. And when they started out to start with, it might take a whole day for a whole, for one round, you know. Then they started out a little later in the morning and come back a little earlier at night. And then finally they could take two rounds, you know. And that's the way they did. Then they had their big trashing machines up there, you know. Do you know the name of the place where they bought this farm? Well, the closest place I know is Portal, some kind of a railroad station up there. In North Dakota? In North Dakota, yeah. And my cousin was up there, and he said it's one of the nicest farms right up there, when he was up there. Is that the western part, or is it the–? That's in the, in the northwestern part, yeah. Northwestern part. Close to Tully and Minot, maybe? I don't know, just Portal. Portal is the– Portal. Was the closest, some kind of a railroad center or something up there. Then in the wintertime, they went up in Canada hunting. They had dogs with them, and they had a gang, you know, about six, seven guys. And they was all, they all had that big fur coats on, like they had during that time, you know. The wild west? Wild west, yeah. I'm sitting together with Inar Bougreen in Moline, Illinois. And he came to the United States in 1928, and we have June 5, 1986 today. So your father, now he was born 1864. Yeah, that's right. So he must have been in the 20s then when he came to North Dakota, you think? Yeah, because he was around 40 when he came back. And then he married my mother, you know. I see. So he was here maybe 20 years then? Yeah, something like that, I guess. And then he married my mother, and she didn't– After they got married, she didn't want to go because she had her mother yet to take care of. She lived just a little ways from there, and she didn't want to leave. So then he called or wrote to somebody over here to sell the farm up in North Dakota. So then afterwards, he bought a farm over there where we was born. In– In Småland, you know. And you were born in what place? I was born right there. In Hult? No, no. They call it Wuschel, and he bought the place there. Well, he bought– He bought first one place, then he bought some more land from another farmer over there. And so we was born over there. They call it Wuschelland. Wuscheland? Yeah. And what parish or soccer is that? Lomarid Soccer. Lomarid? Lomarid Soccer, yeah. Lomarid Soccer. Yeah. Uh-huh. I show you some pictures of the farm or the place, you know. So he was the part owner of this farm then in North Dakota? Yeah. Well, he bought the other guy out. Oh, he did? The way I understood, he bought– What was the reason he went home to Sweden after so many years? Well, he was going with my mother, you know. Oh, he was? Sure. So they knew each other from back in Sweden before he left? Oh, yeah. She was working for his folks, you know. Oh, I see. On the farm. Childhood sweetheart then. Yeah. Piga, you know. Yeah. And he probably wrote letters to her and she didn't want to come over. Yeah, yeah. She wrote and he went home different times, you know, in between there. But she didn't want to come over? No. Then when he got married, and then she decided not to go. So then he had to sell the farm up there. So when he came back then to Lymar, he bought– He bought that little place, yeah. I think it was about 80 acres or so. So then he settled down there, and how many children– Five. We were five of us, yeah. You were one of the youngest, or– No. No. I wish I could get– So you had one brother that was older than you? Yeah. And he also came over? Well, he was here a year before I did. Then I came over, you know. So your father then, did he have any interest to go back to Dakotas? No, no, I don't think so. He enjoyed himself over there, that little place. He was settled then? I don't know where I got– I got some– Well, anyhow, he bought that little place, and that's where we was born. And he raised his family there and stayed on? Yeah. When you were old enough, though, do you remember he talked about his life in the United States? Yeah, he used to talk. He used to talk American to me, you know, when we was out picking potatoes, you know, and he was running the– whatever they call it, you know, they run up the furrow, you know, and then we had to go and pick potatoes afterwards. Then he talked American a little bit, you know. He did? We picked up a little bit. Yeah. Did he talk to you about what he experienced over there in North Dakota? Yeah. What kind of– He said in the wintertime, they had– they built a little place, you know, where they could have a cow, you know, like a little barn. Then they made a rope from the house over to the barn, and sometimes he says the snow was just– buried the barn and the house and everything, and they had to go through that rope, you know, to get to the barn to feed the cow, I guess. So they had a– That's a long time ago, you know. That's a long time ago, yeah. So the other guy, you know, that was with him, he was not married either, then? No, they were– They were room together? They were from about the same place over there. In the small house? Yeah. I see. His name was Ring. Ring? Or Ringwald. He went to Minneapolis, I guess, when he got tired of farming, he bought some kind of a cigar store, you know, and pool hall and stuff they had up there in Minneapolis. So he stayed on there then? Yeah. So then they sent their Bible down here. That's the last I heard of it. I guess they're dead now, you know. But his kids went through college and everything, so they must be around someplace. So that was one of your father's belongings he got with him, then, the Bible from– Confirmation Bible. Yeah. You know, that was the idea over there. When he left the old country, the folks or the mother always sent a Bible with him, you know. That same thing when I left. She sent a Bible with me, you know. Same thing with my brother. So I suppose that's what he did during that time, too. So you went to school then in Lomarie, then? Yeah. And confirmed in Lomarie Church? Yeah. And were there any discussion about going to the United States then when you came up in the age of 14, 15? Well, just like we had a fever, we want to go, you know, because my dad talked about it so much, and that was so good, you know. He said it was good? Oh, yeah. He said it was all right. He never stopped us from going, you know. My mother was a little bit reluctant, you know. But my dad, he thought, let them go. So your brother then, he was the first one? Yeah. So did he buy his own ticket then, or did somebody? There was no relation over here that brought you over? No, no. There was nobody? We had some friends, you know, where we went to with name of... My God, I can't remember names no more. Alf, Alf was their name. They was from Lomarie, too, you know. And they still were in... They come over before my brother did. And they were in Rockford? Yeah, they were in Rockford. And my brother and Alf, they wrote together. So then he finally decided he was going to go. So do you remember then when he bought his ticket, your brother? Or you were old enough to remember? Oh, yeah. I remember when he bought the ticket. So what were you thinking then? Were you thinking about the 59? Then I already put in for, you know, to come over. For visa? Yeah. So then the king, you had the right to the king, you know. So then he wrote back to me and asked me what reason I had going. So, you know, that was during military years, you know. We was just in the military. I was just going to go out in the army, I guess, then. You were ready to be going into the... I had my examination and everything. So he asked me what the reason if I had somebody over here that I could go to and stuff. So then my teacher I had in school, you know, he helped me to write to him and tell him that I had work when I come over to Rockford. So then they said it was okay. I think I still got that papers from that time, you know. So you didn't have to go into the service then? No, no. So you bought your ticket yourself then? Yeah. Do you remember how much it cost? Oh, I don't know. You had money saved up then or your dad... Well, I tell you, I tell you one thing that happened over there. We was kids. Me and some other guy was going to... This is really some story I shouldn't even tell it. We was going to go fishing, me and the guy. We was 13. We was about 13 years old and we was going to go down to the lake and fish, you know, to the river. And on the way we went by the school, you know, and Preston Gordon, or Preston, lived, Buddha. So his daughters was home from Stockholm. They were teachers someplace in Stockholm up there. They was home on vacation. And that was during when the cherries was ripe, you know. So then one of them come down by the fence there and said, one of the kids, she says, why don't you come over and pick some cherries for us? So she asked us if we could come over in the morning and pick some cherries. So I said yeah, and the other guy too said, but the other guy never showed up. So I went over there and I picked some cherries in the small trees down there. Had a big garden, a big yard, you know. And I picked there. And then they had some big trees next to the house and they were way high, you know. I had to use a ladder to get up there. And the old guy, the old priest, or Preston, he was old. He was 80 years old, you know. And I seen him. I was up there picking cherries, you know, in the big tree there. And I seen him come out, you know, walking in the lawn there. And then he went right under the tree and he looked up, you know, like that. Then he went in the back way. And I didn't know nothing before I heard a shot, you know, on my arm. See? My arm there. I was reaching for some cherries and by God, here he shot me. But I didn't fall down. So then his daughter, they come out. And boy, I don't know how she ever got up in the tree, but she come up and held my arm, you know, and held me and touched the tree there. And finally, he stood there. And the farmer that had the farm over there, the press cordon, you know, he heard a commotion over there, so he went over and he jerked the gun away from the old guy, just like he was going to shoot again. He went berserk. Yeah. Well, I suppose he was, you know, his mind was gone, I suppose. What was his name? Ernstrom. Ernstrom. Ernstrom, yeah. Preston Ernstrom. Yeah. So what happened? Then we went to court, you know. Before you went to court, there was probably bleeding. Oh, yeah. Was it hurting? Oh, my gosh. I thought I was going to die. It hurt so bad, you know. And you didn't lose the grip? His son. You were still up there. You didn't lose the grip or fell down? No. The farmer come over and he had a rope, you know, and he took a rope around me and let me down with the rope. You were that high? I was that high, you know. There was no branches below there, neither. I was on the first branch there to go out. And if I'd fell down, I would have fell down in concrete or granite stones. They had laid there like steps, you know. So then they called his son. He was a dentist over in Jarnaby. That's the railroad station, you know, next to Lomarin. Jarnaby. Jarnaby, yeah. So then he come up, he had a car, you know, and he took me to Equy, La Serette. So I was there for, I think it was about 17 weeks. 17 weeks? Yeah. I was over there. And it's funny, I could get good enough so I could work, you know, and everything. Worked for Dears for 34 years. I still got some pellets in there. You still have some left? Yeah. About six of them is in there. They can't take them out? No, they were in the bones or something. So they said if we was going to get them out, that would make it worse yet, you know. So that was what you call a shotgun blast? Yeah. 12-gauge shotgun. See? The whole bone here was shot off. You know, you got two bones here. They were shot off? Yeah. See that knuckle there? Got a knuckle. How did you have your hand, I mean, away from your face? Well, I was reaching out to get some branch of cherries, you know. Oh, I see. So he probably aimed at your hand. He aimed at that. He said, the old man said he thought it was a squirrel. That's what he said. That awful. Then he didn't want to pay nothing for it. We were fighting him for three years in court, you know, before my dad finally got something from him. I think he got about $6,000 or something. So that's how we got the money to go to Sweden. Of course, my dad had it. He wasn't that broke or anything. He had the money, but that's the way we got our own money. So that took a long time for you to recuperate, though. Oh, yeah. You couldn't work for a long time. No. You were 13, you said? I was 13 years old. So you were not even confirmed? Yeah, I guess it was about that time. But that's some story, boy. Because so many weeks in the hospital, it must have been a pretty bad rep. Well, it got infection, you know. I see. I had Ernstrom, you know, Ernstrom. He was a big guy. You know, that was during when the Russians had that revolution or something over there. And he was a guy named Steinholm. He joined the Russian, the White Army, you know, in Russia at that time. And he was living around there someplace, and one time some guys got hold of him over on the road someplace there, and they was going to kill him, I suppose. Then this priest, you know, or president, Ernstrom, he come over there, so he helped him out, you know. Of course, he was a big guy, you know. He was a real big guy, that Ernstrom. So he helped him out at that time so he didn't get killed. But he was mad at them guys that joined the Russian White Army, you know. So that... It was Schurkoherde Ernstrom? Yeah, Schurkoherde Ernstrom. What happened then in the community when a story like this came out? Well, he had another guy or another priest there, you know, take care of it. His name was Johnson, I think. So you didn't have to pick any more cherries? No, no more cherries. But that's some story, though, isn't it? What did the daughters know? Well, one of them stood up for him, you know, but it seemed like the other one, she was more humane, you know. She tried to help us out and help out a little bit and thought it was awful, you know. But that other one, she was just like... Ernstrom was, you know. She just didn't want to do nothing. And he had the money. He was rich, you know, that guy. He had the money. Because one of the daughters actually told you to pick the cherries? Yeah, both of them told me to come over there. Both of them? Yeah. But the old man probably... Old man, you know, their father probably didn't know about it, you know. He probably slept about 10 o'clock. And then he go out in the garden there and walk around. And he happened to see me, I suppose, and he thought it was somebody... Well, I think he thought somebody was in there stealing cherries for him. Of course. That's what I thought he... Because he probably could see you because of the step ladder and all. Yeah, sure. And you have it up there. Yeah. So, yeah, it was really a story. Yeah. I suppose you never forget that one. Oh, no, I never do. What did your father or parents say about it? Well, they want him to take care of it and pay for it, you know, but he won't do nothing, so he had to go to court. So we had to go to Herald's Wetland. Herald's Wetland, yeah. You know, in Tronos. They went the whole way? Yeah. You didn't settle on the court, or you... No, no, the court settled it, yeah. I was up there in court, too. I remember standing in front of the judge over there, you know. Oh, I see. Well, you had to tell your story then. Yeah. But he had money. I think he paid them off, too. Otherwise, I would have got lots more. Oh, I see. You never know. Then he had some kind of insurance, you know, I suppose they have to have over there for anybody to work or anything. Then they got me on that, you know, and I got some, so much a month from them, whatever it was. I forgot now. I even got some of that when I left. But then after you left Sweden, you didn't get anything? No, no. It was the end of it. Yeah, it was the end of it. So before you got this idea, you know, of going to the United States, you didn't look for any other job in Sweden at that time? No. No, I worked for a neighbor farmer over there for a while. Was the arm hurting you then? Well, it got better and better, and finally I didn't pay too much attention to it. Of course, it was sore, you know, for years there afterwards. So then you received a visa to go to the United States. Yeah, yeah. And you bought your ticket then in Nesjö, or how did you remember? Or you got a ticket? Or did your brother send one, for instance, from Russia? No, no. No, I got it someplace there. I can't remember just where I got it. Maybe it was in Nesjö. See, we had about two miles to Nesjö, you know, Swedish miles, and two Swedish miles to Tranås, about four miles to Jönköping, and we had about half a, not even a half a mile down to the railroad station, Arneby. See, Arneby is on the railroad track between Nesjö and Tranås, and up Lindköping. Yeah, we was away up in Stockholm. My dad took me up to Stockholm for that insurance company, you know. They want to see me and check me up. So my dad took me up there and had the examination, you know. So were there any others in the area that were interested to go with you to the United States? Were you the only one that left? No, my cousin. Went with me too, yeah. He went too. What was his name? G.J. Lux. Lux? Lux, yeah. Oh, he's a soldier. Soldatnam? Yeah, I don't know. He was born around where we was born, you know. And you were both heading for Rockford? Yeah. He had relation also that he left for Rockford? No, just good friends, you know. Good friends, yeah. Yeah. So what did you go with now, Gripsholm or Drotningholm? Gripsholm. Oh, Gripsholm. Yeah. I think we come over here in October, around the 20th of October in 28. And you went on the, what you call, third class? You didn't go second class? No, I didn't go second class. You didn't go second class? You bought the third class ticket? Yeah. For Chinese class? Yeah. We had a lot of fun on that boat though. We danced, you know. There was a guy from, I forgot now where he was from in Sweden, but he had an accordion. And he was playing accordion and we was dancing there until he come and chased us down at night. Oh. So you had a good trip over there? Yeah. Well, I was sick for about three days though. Sea sick. So when did he hit you? Outside Newt Fredenburg before? Yeah, right after we left Gothenburg. They had a big storm on the North Sea, you know. And that was after the storm, you know, them big holes. I was standing out on the fore, where first couple of girls was over there. They got sick in the dock. So I helped them down in the cabins, you know. Then I went up there and I thought I was, you know. So then I went out and the boat, sometimes it was right down to the waterline. And then all at once it was about three stories down, you know. Them holes, it seemed like the boat went over them holes. Then I got sick. And boy, I was sick. I couldn't even get out of bed for three days. Three days? Yeah. Then about the fourth day, I laid in bed and put my pants on. Then we come over. We went over between England and Scotland there someplace. I'd seen land on both sides, you know. Then we come out on the Atlantic. Then it started to get nice, you know, and I was all right. So then you could enjoy the food and the dancing? Oh, yeah. Yeah. So were there many immigrants from Sweden then on the boat? Well, we must have been about 800 to 900. Some of them went to Canada, you know. They stopped in Halifax then, and then they let off a whole bunch over there. I guess around 400, they left for Canada. You don't remember if there were any Swedish-Americans on that went back? Yeah. Yeah. There was one from Rockford, but I forgot his name now. He was on the boat, and he helped us out. When we got to New York, you know, he helped us out, you know, to go to a restaurant, you know, and go get something to eat, you know, while we waited for the train to take us this way. You didn't have to go to Ellis Island? No. No. So you had no trouble then with the examination or anything? No. No. You didn't show the arm then for any doctor? No. No. He never asked me about that at all. So you just went to land and... I've been lucky, though, you know, worked 34 years, and worked hard on the shop, you know, down to Proworks. And I guess the good Lord helped me, you know. So then you and your cousin Lux continued on to Rockford. Yeah, then he was in Rockford for quite a while. Then I went to Moline, and then he went out west. So that's the last I saw of him, you know. He stopped here when he left. He had a little Ford, I think, with the rummage seat in, you know, he had. So he went out west, and he settled down in Spokane, Washington. So he worked with lumber, like a lumberjack out there. He just died here about a couple of years ago. But you never saw him after that? I never saw him after that. My brother was out there. I saw him once. So your brother now, what kind of work was he doing in Rockford? He was working for General Electric. He was making radio cabinets, you know, and stuff. It was like a cabinet factory, woodworking. Yeah. He was some kind of a setup man, you know, for some machines up there. So he arranged then for you to get started in the furniture business? He got you started to get a job in the furniture factories? Well, he worked in one factory that, when I first came over, I started in that one where he worked. And then I got mad at the boss. He blamed me for something over there, whatever it was. I was supposed to drill some holes, and he showed me just exactly where to drill them holes, in that some kind of a front for a desk or chest drawer or whatever it was. And when it was all said and done, it wasn't in the right place. And that was for sample, you know. He was going to send out for sample. And I got so mad at him, I quit. And I should have never done that because I could get a job afterwards, you know. You were blackballed then? Yeah, well, I told him. I said, I quit. I said, you go and get my check, and I quit, and that's all I heard of him. Then my brother quit, too, after that, and he went to another factory, Winnebago. Then I got in there, too, so I worked there for a while, until he started getting... You know, during 1929 and 1930 there, you couldn't... You worked for a couple of months, and then you were off a couple of months, and that's the way it was in 1930. It was when the Depression hit? Yeah, the Depression was on then. Then the boss, he come over, and he said, I forgot his name. No, he was a Swede, you know. So he come over, he says, I have to cut your wages, he says. And I think I had 32 cents an hour. I had. So he was going to cut me down once more. Well, I says, I am going to take no cut. I says, I quit. Go and get my check. I says, I don't want to, which I shouldn't have done, you know. But I did. So he went down and got the check. Site 2, continuation with the inner voglen, Moline, Neu. Site 2. Was that a big farm, or...? Well, about 160 acres. Was it a Swede? The first one I worked for, he was a Swede. His name was Hansen. He was a pretty good guy, you know, but he didn't have no tractor or nothing. We had, well, he had a tractor, that's right. He had a tractor. And then he had horses, too. And I sat on that cultivator in the summertime, you know, cultivate corn. You know, how you had to steer that one with your legs, you know, with your feet. One row, one row cultivator, yeah. And then some other farmer over there by Davis Junction, he asked me, he says, why don't you come over and work for me next summer, he says, because I went into town, you know, during the wintertime. So I decided I was going to go out to him, but he didn't have no tractor at all, you know, so that was all horses. And, you know, when you have six horses for disc or plow, you know, you got something to take care of. Of course, I was a little used to it, you know, from home. So I worked for him for that summer then. Then I went into town. Then the NRA come in, you know, so they had to pay you 45 cents an hour. You wasn't here then, were you? No, NRA. NRA, yeah, they called it. I don't know what national... So it was the federal government? Yeah, they made that law, you know. Was that during the Roosevelt administration? Yeah. It was during Roosevelt? Yeah, that was during Roosevelt, yeah, because he was the one that got in there in 1932. Yes. Yeah, so then he got that through, so they had to pay 45 cents an hour. So then I went down to the shop again, where I quit, you know, and the boss happened to see me, and he said, Hey, he says, do you want to go to work? And I said, Yeah, I'm looking for work. So I went back there and worked then. So then I got laid off, and I told a guy with the name of Eric Green. He had a car, you know, so I asked him, Would you take me down to Moline? I want to see if I can get a job down there someplace. You heard something about the Moline? Yeah, Moline was plows and farm machinery, you know, and stuff they made. Did they pay better than to get to Rockford? No, I started for deers for, I think it was 45 cents an hour. What year was that? That was in 1935. 1935. 1935 in the fall I started for deers. And then I worked down there for about two or three weeks. And then Wally Swanson, the employment team, he come over to me and says, He says, Did you ever do any nailing? And I said, No. I says, Boy, I try anything, but this job, I said, you know, I was on maintenance, you know, and you had to go and do everything, clean up stuff. So he says, Well, you report over to the warehouse, he says, to Chris Michelson. In the morning, he says. So I got over there and here Chris Michelson, he was a Swede, or Norwegian, you know, and we got along pretty good, so he put me on piecework. So then I started on piecework, make about $32 a week or whatever it was at that time. Then some more laws come in and you had to pay a little more. Then we made $36 a week or so, you know. So there was no union then when you started? No, no, there was no union then. The union never started before in, I think it was during the war or right after the war, you know. So how about Rockford, the furniture factories, were they unionized? No. No? No union either? And nobody wanted to talk about union, I suppose, in Rockford? No, but I tell you what we did down to Dears, we got applications, you know, they brought in, you know, and we was signing up, you know. You signed up? Yeah, I signed up behind the clothes, you know, behind something so they didn't see it because the company didn't like to have a union in, you know. So we was signing up and finally we got enough people signed up, so we got the union in there. So the management didn't like it? No, no. At that time, if they caught somebody, you know, they transferred them over to like wagon works, you know, someplace. Oh, I see. They couldn't fire them though? No, no, they didn't fire them, they just transferred them. Transferred them over to other departments? Because the wagon works, you know, that was what they called the old people's home. They didn't have no union down there. Oh, that's what they called it? That's what they called it, the old people's home. I never heard it before. Oh, they were mostly old Swedes working there down there? Yeah, all Belgians and Swedes. I was transferred there one time when we was laid off down there in July, you know, it started to get slow. So then I got transferred down there to wagon works and I worked with some Belgians down there. Boy, if you didn't come in at 6 o'clock and start to pile up, you know. In the morning? In the morning. Then they didn't like it. They wanted to get going right away as soon as, you know, because I was nailing down there too. So this work that you're talking about, nailing, what was that really? Well, down to wagon works, they was nailing wagon bottoms, you know, for the wagons. You mean the wood bottoms? Yeah. Oh, I see. Yeah. And that was hard work too, them bottoms for the, but down here to plow works, you know, we was making boxes to put stuff in, you know, like plows and everything. That was nice work. I liked that. So the Belgians, they were peace workers and the... Yeah. Yeah. And if you didn't go down there about an hour ahead of time, you know, and load up, you know, so you could start on peace work right at 7 o'clock. They didn't like it too good. So they froze you out then more or less? In other words, how did they... No, I don't know. You could feel it that they didn't like you then? I worked down there for a little bit and then I got called back to plow work, I think. One year I was off from... I got married the 22nd day of June in 1936. Oh. And I got laid off the 22nd day of June. And I never got back. I never got back before, I think, next year in January or February that year. But then I worked for WPA when they made 4th Avenue over there from 34th Street and down to 23rd Street. Yes. I worked on there for a while. And then Wally Swanson, one morning he come over and he said, Einer, he said, he hollered Einer. I lived down here on 5th Avenue and 11th Street. And he hollered Einer, Einer. I wonder who he was. So I went out and he said, Do you want to go to work for about a month? So I said, Yeah. I worked for WPA, but then I didn't go and tell him, you know, that I quit, you know. So I went down to Plow Works then and they had a big order for Argentina, I think, for plow shares and stuff, you know, for plows. So I worked there nailing boxes and making boxes, you know, and stuff for, well, it took about a month and a half. Then they didn't have any more then, so then I got laid off again. And then I had a heck of a time to get on WPA. So I forgot now the name of the guy that took care of it and I said, By God, I said, I'm entitled to it, to work when I'm out of work. So he finally put me on, but he sent me out to the airport when they made the runaways over there. You know, they put that asphalt on there and black topping, you know. So, and it was in the wintertime then, it was cold. And the first, the first three or four days when I worked, well, we worked about three days a week, I think it was. And the first week, I couldn't even get a, I walked out there. I didn't have no car, you know. So I walked all the way from 9th Street down here. All the way out to the airport? All the way out to the airport. I started out at four o'clock in the morning. Four o'clock? Yeah. Then the next week, I finally got a ride with the guy for a dollar a week, you know, I was going to pay him a dollar a week, which was good, you know. So you had a rough time there, when you were in the Vengeance, then you had to start at six o'clock for the, for the, quasi the airport, four o'clock in the morning. Yeah. So when you came off from Rockford, John Deere, was this the first place you stopped at or you stopped at Stronbeck and Becker yourself? No, no, I went to Free Church over here. Yes. It's in the next block over here, you know, Free Church. And because we used to go to church, you know, we was used to that, so I went up there and I got acquainted with some guy that worked down at the plow works, with the name of Palmer. Did you join the Free Church then? No, I didn't join, but I went up there and went to Sunday school. And, and so then I got to know a guy. He said, I'm going to go, go and talk to Stronbeck. I didn't know who they were then, but he talked to him and he said, yeah, come on out, we'll put you to work. They were friends, Stronbeck? Yeah. One of them, there was different Stronbecks. Oh, there was several. I forgot now which one it was, but he said, come on out. And he put me to work. So did you live up around this area then or? I lived down on the... You voted then, or? No, I was married, you know. Oh, you were, I see. Yeah, so I had to have work to get along, you know. Of course, I saved up a little bit, you know. So then when it started to get a little better, then my wife went to work and, and she worked and we got along pretty good. How long did you work at Stronbeck and Becker? Well... See, I come down here in the spring, so I worked there all summer until fall. I think it was in December when the Wally Swanson told me, asked me if I was ready to go to work down at the plow works. So then I quit out there, you know. So I worked down there for about six or eight months. What kind of work was there? There was... Well, handles, handles, you know. You were sanding handles and, and working on different machines, you know. And it was for chisels and... Yeah, for irons, irons, you know, ironing handles and stuff like that. And it was all woodwork? Yeah, it was all woodwork. And they had a lot of toys. They made a lot of toys, too. So there seemed to have been a pretty good demand for toys during the Depression. Yeah. They didn't cease. Yeah, they made a lot of toys there. I know they sent me down one night to run a saw, you know. They had about six different blades on the saw, you know. And I was running that machine for a while, too. That was all toffee toys, you know. Uh-huh. And you rented an apartment for several years? Yeah, light housekeeping we had to start with. Uh-huh. And you did the same thing in Rockford? You rented then together with some other guys? Oh, yeah. We lived in a hotel, Svea Hotel up there. We used to live in the wintertime. Like I said, two summers there, I went out on the farm and worked. So when you worked on the farm, there was only... you could sustain your living. You didn't make any money on it? No, $15 a month. $15? Yeah. But I had enough money then so I could go into town and live during the night, you know, or during the winter. And one time I went in there, and I went over on Kissawaukee Street over there, and I was looking at cars, you know, and here they had a Model T Ford. So I asked him how much he wanted for it. That was before you had to have a license. I guess you had a title for it or something. And I bought that Ford, you know, Model T Ford. So I know a little bit how to run it. But then I got in on a one-way street going down, you know, and the street ended. And then I didn't know how to back up or turn around, you know. So I went home then, and the guy I lived with, Eric Green, he went with me, you know, and got me out of there. So I run that Ford a little bit, and finally I run it all over. Took it out to farm. So they were pretty good? So Model T Ford. They were pretty good when you got used to them, you know. They were dependable? Yeah. So in Rockford, there was a lot of people that were unemployed? Oh, yeah. During the hard years, 1931, 1932? Oh, yeah. You couldn't hardly get a job. One time I worked for Hormann Page. That was a construction outfit. And we was down by the river tearing down all foundry or whatever it was down there. It was really bad work, you know, dangerous work. But I worked for them for a while, and they didn't have nothing then. So did you join any of the larger groups in Rockford? The Vikings, HWASA? I belonged to Vikings, yeah. Vikings? Yeah. One Sunday morning, well, that was New Year's Day. We went to a dance. We went to a dance the night before. And an SF Hall or something they called it. There was a Norwegian club, you know. They all had a hall on Third Avenue up there. And we went over to the dance up there, and we met, me and another guy met a couple of girls, you know. So we walked all the way home with them. They lived outside of town there. They called Chicken Charlie or something they called the place, you know. So we stayed there until late in the morning, and it snowed. Boy, it snowed, and it was about this deep of snow. Streetcars didn't even run at that time. They were all... they couldn't run, you know. So we walked home. And by God, that morning I got... I got just like I had a pain in my stomach, you know. And just like toothache. So I went down to a Viking club down there, to the club, and I sat around. And boy, it got worse, you know. And I thought I better go home. So I went home, and some other guy come up, a good friend of mine, come up. And I told him, I says, I got an awful... just like toothache around my stomach. And he said, he said, maybe it's the same thing I had. He said, I had it last year. He says, there was a paniccitis, you know. So he said, I'm going to call my doctor, he says. His name was Lundholm, I think. And he said, I'm going to call him and tell him to come up and see you. So he come up then, and he said, you go right to the hospital, he says. Right up to Swedish American Hospital. So I went up there, and he took x-rays in the afternoon then. So then about five o'clock, the doctor come back and he says, now you got a bad appendix, he says. But if we operate tonight, he says, I'm going to guarantee for you that you'll be all right. But if you wait in the morning or wait, he says, I won't guarantee for you. So I told him to go ahead, you know. So they took me in about seven o'clock and operated. And everything come out all right. How were you able to pay for this now? Did you have insurance? No. I tell you, Jannie Lynn Fund, you know, she donated so much to Swedish American Hospital up in Rockford for immigrants, you know, that didn't have no money, that they paid for. So they must have paid for it because I never heard nothing. You never heard anything? No. So that fund, Jannie Lynn's fund, must have paid for it. But you didn't have a job then at that time? No, it was pretty slow, you know. You work a little bit now and then, you know. So do you remember if there were any Swedish socialists in Rockford at that time in the early 30s? There were some mayors that were running on the socialist ticket. No, I can't remember about that. I know, I know, we joined some kind of a labor club up there. And there was a whole bunch of guys, you know, the evicted guys, you know. I know one time on Kishwacker Street over there, they was putting out the family and they put the stuff out on the sidewalk. And they took it out and us guys put it back in again, carried it back in the house again. And I remember one time we dumped a truck over so they couldn't load it. But the cops never said nothing. They never bothered us, you know. So I don't know what kind of a club it was, but... So there weren't many families that had problems and they couldn't pay the rent or pay the houses? Yeah, I remember one time one family up there, Abrahamson. He built a house, a nice little bungalow, had all hardwood floor on it, you know, and everything. And he owed the Swedish-American Bank up there, he owed them a little money, whatever it was now. And he couldn't pay, you know. So then they foreclosed on him and they come out and they put his furniture out on the sidewalk, took the house, put this stuff out on the sidewalk, and gave him so much money so he could live, go to a hotel or something for the night, you know. So they took the whole house away from him. And he done the work himself, he was a carpenter. So he was put out on the street? Yeah, put him right out. And he was a good friend, he was born around where we was born, you know. Yeah, they threw him right out on the street, gave him $10 or $12 or whatever it was for a hotel room for the night. Boy, they were rough at that time. You didn't have any thoughts about going back home to Sweden then? No, not then, but I've been thinking about it lately, you know. My brother was home here about, he died about three years ago. He was home about six years ago or so, he was home. So he was married then during the Depression, your brother? Oh yeah. Did he have any job continuously or was he on? Oh yeah, he worked pretty good. He did? Yeah, he was a jigsaw, you know, and they were pretty hard to find a good jigsaw, you know. So he was a jigsaw at that time, until he started for General Electric. Then he got to be some kind of a setup man for some machines over there. And he stayed with you all this time? He worked there for a while. So when you left them for Moline, you had the idea that it was much better here to work for John Deere or some other factories? Yeah, I liked to get into Deere's, you know. So Deere was a good name then? Sure. Did you meet people from Moline in Rockford at any time? No, no. They told you about it? I don't know where I got the idea from to go down to Moline, but I had an idea. I asked this guy to take me down. He let me off right down here on 6th Avenue, him and his girlfriend. And I got a room over on 12th Street and 6th Avenue. And you didn't know anybody here? No. You just came from a clear sky and landed in Moline? Sure, sure. I got tired of them furnished factories up there. How was Rockford when you didn't work? I mean, what kind of fun did you have after work? You went to dances or...? Oh, yeah. Yeah. We went out to dances. My buddy, he had a car, and we took girls out. Oh, I see. You went to Rockford to do that? Oh, yeah. We went up to Chicago a lot of times. To Chicago? Oh, yeah. On the north side or south side? We used to go up there on Sunday morning and come back Sunday afternoon. To the north side of Chicago? Yeah, mostly on the north side. And Evanston. Oh, I see. What kind of doings did you have there? Well, we used to go to that park over there, what you call... That was on the north side there. I don't know if it's still there now or not. They had merry-go-rounds, and they had everything in there. I forgot what the name of it was. And there the people came together, and you could meet a lot of Swedes, I suppose. Oh, yeah. North side of Chicago, there's a lot of Swedes. Did you join the church in Rockford? No. No? We used to go to Salvation Army quite a bit. Salvation Army? My brother and his wife belonged to Salvation Army. Oh, I see. When he left Rockford, he belonged to Salvation Army. But you never joined up with anyone then? No. That was when you came here and got married then? Yeah. But we decided when we got married that we wasn't going to worry about any religion after we was married, because she was Catholic and I was Protestant. And we decided I go with you to your church, and if you go with me to mine. But I never signed up for any. And it worked out? It worked out good. Very good, yeah. So how did you marry? In a Catholic church? No. We had a lawyer downtown. I see. Justice and Peace. Justice and Peace, yeah. Oh, so there was a democratic way to settle? Sure, sure. Yeah? Yeah. So, and did you have any children? No. No? So there was no problem in raising a family? No, no, no. Just you and your wife? So now I'm alone, you know. You're alone and you have no thoughts of going back to Sweden? Well, I was going to go and get a passport. How long is a passport good for? Ten years, isn't it? Oh, it must be ten years. Ten years, yeah. I was going to get one in case I like to go when somebody else go, you know. Yeah. See? So you have a brother left then? Huh? You have a brother left in Sweden? Oh, yeah. And a sister. And a sister? My twin sister. So, and you haven't seen them? No, I haven't seen them for seven years since I left. I see. My mother, she died when she was 65. She had cancer of her stomach. And my dad, he passed away when he was 83. He sat at the kitchen table and just slumped over and died. From heart attack, I suppose. I see. But he was 83 years old. So your sister, now, she is married and lives in the... No, she isn't married. She's single. Oh, she's single. She lives in Iquit. 28 West Longatan, Iquit. So you write letters then back and forth? Oh, yeah. I just got a letter the other day from her. She wanted me to come home, you know. So what do they tell you now? Do you understand what they... What you write, yeah. What they write and... Oh, yeah. I got a heck of a time to make a letter, you know, because I forgot... You know, I haven't talked Swede for at least 50 years, you know. My wife never talked no Swede. We wasn't with any Swedes or anything. Just my one brother come down or when we went up to Rockford. All her folks live in St. Charles, Elgin and Chicago. So we usually went up there, you know, on weekends. So... And when did you go to the Viking Club often then? When we went to Rockford, my brother belonged there. We went to Viking. You didn't join up here in Molina? No. So you don't belong to any Swedish organization? No, no. I was going. They want me to join Viking, you know, so I can get a key and go there. I got some friends that belong there. But I haven't got to it, you know. Fellowship belongs to something, I guess. So... And... But you write to them in Swedish, don't you? Oh, yeah. Yeah. They don't understand English, of course. No, no. I had a... On my father's side, there was a second cousin. She come over here and see me, you know. So she talked and she talked, you know, and I couldn't understand what she was talking about. So then we went out in the back here, and I started to talk to her, and then she started to talk American. Boy, she could talk better than I could. She must have went to school, you know. Boy, she talked better American than I did. But my other... My brother's girl come over. She couldn't talk no American, you know. Then you had to... But we got along. My brother was here and his wife. They were both Swedes, you know. His wife was born in Rockford, but she could understand Swedish. She can write Swedish. She write to him, too, over there in Sweden. So how about your brother now? What does he write about? Well, I hardly never hear anything from him. He don't write too good. His daughter, you know, that Vivian was down here, she usually write for him. I guess he is, so he... He walk like this here. I suppose he work too hard, you know. What kind of work did he have? Farming. Farming? Yeah. He hired or rented another farm, you know, and he was busy. He got a tractor over there and everything. My brother said he took him out with the tractor and run all over the neighborhood. So he lives in Lomar, he does? Yeah. He has your... the place where you... He got the homestead, yeah. The homestead. He bought that after dad died, you know. And your dad, he never came over to visit you or... No, no. Did you write to him about that at any time? Well, I wrote to him, yeah, but I don't know if I wrote about anything special, but I wrote to him all the time, you know. You were there for many years? Yeah. How long? 57 years now, since I left the old country in the fall. That's right, yeah. Must be 28... Yeah, that must be 57 years now. Or else it's... 58. 58, yeah, going on 58. So that'll be 58 this fall then. That's a long time, isn't it? That's a lifetime of... Yeah....of your best years. Yeah. You left here in Moline. But I feel good, you know, that I can't remember just like I used to, you know. I can't remember names too good, but that goes with the age, I suppose. So how do you spend your time now then? Well, we go and play yukur. Yesterday, we was over in Port Byron and played yukur. What is that? Port Byron. No, I mean yukur. Yukur, that's a card game, you know. A card game. They got four at the table, you know, and they got so many tables. So here, a couple of months ago, we went out there. You got to have 90 over to get the jackpot, you know. So the jackpot was $130, and I got 90 once, so I got...