 July 24th, 1987. I'm sitting together with Mrs. Cockrell, Rockford, Illinois. And she was born 1914, 12th of January in Rockford. How much do you know now about your father, for instance? He came from Sweden. Yeah. Did he tell you anything about his beginning, his home? Sweden, Sweden? It's just that his folks couldn't afford to keep the three children. There were a boy and a girl and my dad. Were they on a farm? Yes, they were on a farm. Well, my grandparents were. I mean, his grandparents were, but now I don't know about his parents. But I know his grandparents took him and they lived on a farm. And they took dad because they couldn't afford to have all three kids at home. So he was raised by the Murmur and Murfar then? Yeah, that's right. Murmur and Murfar. Did he talk about that, how long he stayed there? Well, he was there his whole life. Went through fifth grade, I believe, in school. Until he was ready to go into the service. Yeah, he was old enough to go into the service and then he decided to come to the United States. Did he have any relation here? Did he have a school with? No, no. He came all on his own. So I don't know. And he came to Rockford directly? Well, no, I think he stopped off. I know my mother did, stopped off in Boston. But now I'm pretty, the majority of the people that came from that area, they came also for religious reasons. They liked what they, they had what they called the Lacerda. They read the Bible and studied in small groups rather than the state church. They didn't really like that. So your father was already with that group then? Yes, uh-huh. Yes, I understood it. He was with that group. So, but I, as in, then he came to Rockford and he worked in the furniture all his life. He was a veneer man. Very beautiful, did some beautiful veneer work. So that's what, but then he came here and then they started the Covenant Church that was started by the Lacerda. And he of course met my mother, sang in the choir, and he met my mother and they were dating. And then my mother got a boyfriend from where she was working and so he left Rockford and went up and homesteaded in Canada. So he homesteaded up there for three years and then my mother went up there and then they came back to Rockford and got married and that's... So your father was homesteading there? Yeah, in Canada. In Canada? Uh-huh. Where in Canada? Pelly, Saskatchewan, around in there. Saskatchewan? Uh-huh. Did they join the church up there during that time? I don't know if he did or not. I would assume so, but I really don't know. Well, the mother wasn't with him then. He went up there because she had a boyfriend, but see. So that... She didn't marry the first boyfriend then? Well, she ended up marrying him afterwards, but anyway. And your mother, now, she came with her parents? No, she came alone also. Alone also? Uh-huh, but she had my aunt here. See, there was 20 years difference. My mother was 20 years younger than my aunt. My aunt had come here before and that was Augusta Stenland. She had come here, so she was living here. And so that's my mother's connection was coming. And then she went first to Boston and then she came to Rockford and then she worked for the Hinchcliffs on the West Side. And she was a maid there. They had several servants and it was the stagecoach guy that she dated after and made my father angry and he went up to Canada. I see. But she worked there until then. Well, then when she went up there then to make amends with my father and then they came back here and they got married. And that is how I got my name, Clemwell, because the Hinchcliffs had a daughter by the name of Clemwell. And when my mother was going to have a child, she wanted her to name after one of hers, the Hinchcliffs. So that's how I got the name Clemwell. And they had some English background? Yeah, they were English. I see. So your father, he liked your mother better than homesteading? Yes, I guess he did. Did he say anything about it later on in his life about the homesteading up there? Oh, yes. He enjoyed that very much. He did? Yes. It must have been hard to be alone up there. Yeah, but of course his brother was up there at that point. Oh, he helped you most of all? Well, I don't know just how it happened, you know, my brother, his brother. So he came directly to Canada then from Sweden, his brother? His brother did, yes. Did he go with your father to Riga? No, no. He stayed in Canada? He lived in Canada all his life, yeah. He came down and visited, so I met him a couple of times. So he married and stayed in Canada? And stayed in Canada, yes. So when he came back then, they married in around 1910, 11? Yeah, 1911 I believe it was. So what kind of work was your father in? He was still in the, he was in the furniture business his whole, whole life in Rockford. He worked for Landstrom's or? He worked for Roddick, you had a picture of it, Rockford, wasn't it? Furniture on 20th Street and Broadway? Yeah, Republic. Yeah, Republic, was that Republic Furniture? Because yeah, that was a big place and then when he got married, you had a picture of the, they had a great big party for him when he got married out at Republic, you know. So your mother quit working then when she married? Yes. It was custom at that time. Oh yes, they all did that. There was only one breadwinner. Yeah, yeah. So. So, and you had one older? Sister. Sister. And how many were you in the family? We were six. Six. How many boys and? Well, there's two boys and four girls. And it's interesting, we're all C's. Catherine was the oldest and then I'm Clemwell and then my brother Carol and then it was Clarice, Constance and then Clifford. No Swedish name at all? No. Why? I don't know. What's the American, how do you say it? I don't know. I was interested in having everybody's name start with C. C, once it got started, she kind of liked that pattern. Oh, I see. Of course, we all named the last one. We all had a hand in that with Clifford. And you married a C too? Yeah, and I married a C, yeah. So there goes the family. Yeah. And did they buy a house then or did they rent it? Well, yeah, no, they bought a house with the money that he got from the homestead. He got that money and they paid that down on a house on North Chicago Avenue. So they bought a house, well, it was already built and they bought that. Do you think your father asked your mother about staying in Canada on the homestead? Was there any stories about that? Not that I know of. I know that my mother was not interested in that type of a life. I know that. She did not like farming. My dad would like to have gone on a farm. So she actually visited him up there? Yes. She went up there and made amends. But she didn't like to stay on it? No, she did not. Like I say, I know several times my father talked about getting a farm, but mother just did not want to be on a farm. She wanted to be in the city, so. So this probably, your father was born on a farm in Sweden. Yes. Where he was used to it. Yeah. Where he was born far. Yeah. So he liked to farm. But he did real well in the furniture and through depression he kept his home. By that time we had a lovely home on South Chicago and it was a brick flat, so it was income property and we were fortunate at that time that we had renters that could pay the rent and he worked and got enough money so that we could keep our home so we didn't lose it like a lot of his friends had lost their homes because they couldn't keep it up. Was he able to keep working during the depression? Yes, he worked for a guy by the name of, was it, not Einer, Johnson. At that time he had his own veneer. Yeah, right up on Charles Street someplace. Yeah, he had his own, this fellow had, I don't know if it was Einer Johnson, but it was Johnson. And he worked for him doing the veneer work and they would do fancy veneer work for people. So that, he worked all through depression. Like I said, he didn't make a mint, but at least we were able to keep the family together. You were all through school then at that time? We were all in school. You were all of it though, yeah? Yeah, I graduated in 1931. I graduated in the depression. So high school. Yeah, but see we were in, during the deep depression, in 1929 we were all in school, my sister and all of us. It was not easy though to feed the... Six of us. Six of us, right, to have food on the table every day. No, but the good Lord took care of us. Did you have chickens in the backyard or? Oh yes, we had chickens. We had rabbits. We had chickens. My dad always had a big garden in the backyard, so we always had our fresh vegetables and he had a lot of fruit trees, so we had our own fruit. Very frugal people. Made do with what they had. Mom canned. But he never mentioned going out farming though during that bad time? He would like to have. So he was still in the... Oh yes, he mentioned that many, well in our older years, I know many times he tried to talk mom into going on a farm, but she just wasn't interested, so. How about the boys now? Were they interested in listening to him when they got older? No, they never took up farming, no. They weren't. They're all city people. They were not interested in trying on that kind of work. No. So when you came out of high school, then, were you with a business college then or what kind of? No, I was lucky to get a job. That was during depression, so I was lucky to get a job. I got a job in a grocery store working part time, and then I got a job in the summertime after I graduated, I got a full time job in a grocery store. And then that store closed, it was a national tea store, and they closed the national teas around here then. And I was off of work for a while, and then I got a job at National Lock. So I worked at National Lock until I was married, and after I was married I worked for three years. And there was also a large place to work. And so my sister, who was the oldest in the family, she really would have loved to have gone to college. She never had the desire, but my oldest sister did. She really wanted to go to college, but of course it was not feasible. And so she's actually the one that helped keep the family together by working real hard. She worked in a grocery store and would bring home fruits and vegetables that were a little damaged at a reasonable price, a whole bucket for a dime or something. So it was impossible then for one person to keep a family of five working alone. You had to have help. You had to have help, yeah. During that time, as you got older, you had more appetite than... Yes. My mother made 24 loaves of bread a week. 24? 24 loaves of bread a week. Three times a week she baked eight loaves of bread. Three days a week. And she made a cake every day when we were all going to school and had lunch. We took our lunches, yeah, coffee, bread, and cake. Every day we had. Mom, if it hadn't been for her doing that, well, I don't know. My mom and dad made the bread together. Oh, I see. Yeah, he would beat it because he was a stronger, and he would stand there and beat it, and she'd pour the stuff in. How about your children? Did you take notice of what you were doing, mixing it together to get the right flavor and so on? Yeah. Why did you do that? She never wrote it down to you. No. Well, she did write some down for us in latter years. I have several of her recipes that have the way she made them. And of course, that's what I like best. Her idea was to have her take it. To have her take it? That would sound good. Well, sometimes there's nothing to take. Yeah. You had to do it yourself. Well, and like I said, they made do. Like when they would make bread, if she didn't have lard, she would just throw in bacon grease. You know, you just used what you had. And of course, we always had chicken, so we always had eggs. And how about holiday times, like Christmas? Oh, we always had. It was extra. That was always extra, yeah. Cinta and luscus. Yeah, oh yeah. And rice pudding and kørv. Did she mix potatoes in the kørv? Yes. She did? Yeah, potato kørv, yeah. But she didn't make any kropkåker? No, mother never did that. So that means she didn't come from Jönlund? No, it's one thing, my husband loves kropkåker, but I've never, yeah. But I have never cared for them, because I never had them when I was a child. We did always had a big Swedish celebration, and it was always at our house, and my aunt and my cousins were always over at our house. How many of your relations were over here now? Well, by this time, it was just my mother's sister. She came to Rockport? Yeah, and she was 20 years older than my mother, and so she was crippled most of her life. And this Esther is her daughter, and she could tell you loads about, she's got a memory of everything. So she stayed at home, then, taking care of her mother? She didn't marry until her mother died, and then she got married. Mr. Själström had been a friend of the family for many years, in fact, I think he's the second cousin, and after her mother died, then his wife had died, so they got together in latter years. It happened many times years ago that one of the children stayed home and thought about marriage. Oh, yeah, Esther did. She just took care of her mother, and her mother was, like I say, crippled, and she'd had several children, and three of them had died in, I think that was before my folks, my mother got here. They had died with some kind of an epidemic they had at the diphtheria or something. It was not the Spanish flu? No. It was before that? In Sweden, you mean? No, here in Rockford. Yeah, so her, Esther's three older sisters, I don't know whether sisters or brothers now, but anyway, they're all buried at the cemetery here, so I know they were living here. Yeah, she had lived here for quite a while, Esther's mother had. I see. And she came alone then first, before your mother? Yes. Now, whether she came with, seems to me she came with her husband. But, like I say, if you have time, you should really talk to Esther, because she could really. She's a good source, huh? Yeah, she's got some good stuff. She's got some good stuff. She's got some good stuff. She's got some good stuff. So, then you started to work at National Lock, and how many years did you work there then, until you met your husband? Yeah, I worked there for six years. Over the war, or? No, it was, yes, I guess I did. I was working there during the war, yeah. So you married then in the? We married 1939. Oh, 1939? Mm-hmm. And how many children do you have? We have three. Three? Mm-hmm. Two boys and one girl? No, two girls and a boy. Two girls. Mm-hmm. And your husband, he is also of Swedish background. Yes, definitely. His mother's either. The name doesn't reveal it, or? No, it doesn't at all. That's why people talk Swedish, and they don't realize that he understands, right? So he lived with? That used to be fun. With his? Grandparents. Grandparents, when they came over. So maybe you can tell me a little bit about that, your grandparents. What kind of ideas they had? I mean, they talked Swedish all the time, I suppose. There was no English spoken then. Very little. Very little. I spoke Swedish when I went to. Grammar school? I couldn't speak English when I went to. No, we did too. So your mother, now when she came over, how old was she then? 16, 17? She was 19. My father was 17. But he was 19. So they kept the Swedish customs and everything. They didn't want to lose it. No, they didn't want to lose it. And they joined the Covenant Church as soon as they could when they came back from Canada. And they were married also by the Covenant. In Chicago, however. They went to Chicago and got married by the Covenant. It was like a honeymoon at the same time then. Yeah, right. They stayed at the minister's house. That was their honeymoon, staying at the minister's house. Who was the minister? Gustaf Johnson? Daniels. Daniels. Or Gustaf Johnson, right? No, Daniels. Daniels. Daniels. Daniels. Daniels. They can't do that today, though, stay with the minister. No, I don't think they would. The ministers nowadays, no. So there was closer friendship at that time. They all knew each other. Were they active with the church work, your mother? Oh, yes. Oh, yes. Like I say, my mother sang in the choir, and she worked in the Covenant women. It was the darkest society at that time. She was very active in that. Yes, Daniels. Daniels. Daniels. Daniels. Daniels. Daniels. Daniels. Daniels. Daniels. Daniels. Daniels. Daniels. Daniels. Daniels. Daniels. Daniels. Daniels. Daniels. Oh, you went to Sunday School there, all you remember? Oh, I was brought there as a baby, and it was confirmed there. Oh. Still there. Do you remember if there was a Swedish school in the summer? Yes, I went to Swedish school. They had it down at White School down by 11th and Charles Street there. There's a school there. We used to walk down there for Swedish school in the summer. Oh, yes. Was that for about five, six weeks, or longer? No, I think it was about four weeks. About two hours a day? Oh yeah, we went early in the morning and came home after, you know, for lunch. Oh I see, so it was a good forenoon. What did you like there? I should have learned a lot of Swedish, but you know, when you don't use it, you don't... Did you like it to go to school like that when the rest of the kids, Americans, were... Yeah, that was okay. I never objected. You were so many of your friends, so you didn't... Yeah. And then we all went together, you know, we all walked together, and made kind of a nice deal out of it, you know. And your brothers also went there? Yes. I'm not sure about the younger ones. I'm not so sure that the younger ones got in on that, but us three older ones did. Because, you know, then they got away from that too, you know, going to Swedish school. How about confirmation? Was it in Swedish? Oh yeah. Not for me, no. I'm sorry. No, that was English. We had our choice, however, but it was English. So they performed both languages. Mm-hmm. And... I was about to say, you know... So did they belong to any other organization, your parents? Like a singing society, or a sick and... They belonged to what was... My father belonged to what was called a sick society. They got together and... Was there with the church combined, or was it outside the church? It was several churches that were... Had a society? Yeah. And they would get together every month, and I think the dues were something like a dollar or two, and they would... If anybody was sick, they got so much money, you know. It was really interesting. My father was very active in that. And that was the only insurance they had, though, at that time? Mm-hmm. That was all the insurance they had. And then they had to have a good health. Yes. To stay away from the doctors. Guds nörk slåns linnemann, my mother would tell you. Well, that was the one that... That's what got us through. Guds nörk slåns linnemann. Was they used for... Everything. Everything? My mother put slåns linnemann, whatever it was, we got slåns linnemann. So, they cured most of the illnesses. Yep. It was a lot of things. But people were not that sick, though. If you compare that today, for instance, do you think people talk about more sickness today than they did years ago? Oh, yes. I think so. And there is... But in those days, they didn't put you in a hospital and diagnose everything, you know. They said it was either rheumatism or pneumonia, and that was it, you know. Depending on... Now, they get so many labels to everything, you know. And if that home remedy couldn't cure it, there was no help then. Then there was no help. And no money to go to the doctor. That's right. Did the doctor call at your house, if you call him? Did he come in with his bag and... Well, yeah. He did, yeah. Yeah, of course. All the children were born at home. All my mother's children were born in the home. And there was a midwife, though? Well, no. It was a real doctor. A real doctor? Oh, yeah. Dr. Oxner. He used to come out to the house and deliver the baby. There was always a nurse there to be, you know... To call on them when it was necessary. Well, mother... With mother for a week. Oh, I see. And we were all born at home. So no doctor, no hospitals. And after the delivery, the baby was not taken to the doctor again for examination or... No, Dr. Oxner took care of him and that was it. Potatoes and lutefisk and herring did the rest. Gudsnod. Huh? Gudsnod. Oh, Gudsnod. Yeah, Gudsnod. Well, that's probably true. They had a strong belief. You have faith. Why things do worse. And you had Dr. Urbom. Oh, yes. You remember him? Oh, yes. He was our doctor. Did your family... Well, he lived only a half a block from us on Chicago Avenue. Oh, well then. Very well. And he had this, what they call sugar pills. Oh, yeah. We were just talking about that the other day. Did they really cure... Well, it must have because that's about... That's the only doctor we ever had when we were that age. We never had any other doctor. Did you have Dr. Urbom then? Oh, yes. But all we were just talking about, it always tickled me that he had to know whether it was the left ear or the right ear or if it was the right arm or the left arm, whatever it was, he had to know exactly. Then he'd measure out these little powder things in the papers. Sometimes we got pills, sometimes we got powders. But he cured most of it. Oh, yes. My sister, when I fell over the railing, a swing broke and we went over the railing and she injured her back and he cured her from that. She lay in bed for a week and he would come over every day. But then he rubbed some... put something on her back. It looked like iodine to me. It was brown. And he would rub that on her back and gave her some pills and she got just fine. And no... No after effects at all. I don't know whether it was, like I say, I'm sure it was 60% faith in whatever it was, you know. But you had faith. That was the only doctor we ever had growing up. Maybe he was one of those persons that had something more than the rest of us. Yeah. Then there was also another one, Axel Olsson. I wasn't familiar with him. Maybe he was earlier. But Erbom I was very familiar with. So you lived only a block away. Did you have telephone in your house or how did you... Not in those days we didn't have telephone, no. There was someone in the block. There was somebody in the neighborhood that had and you just used their phone, you know. So they could give you a message then if... Well that was nice. People were more neighborly then I think, you know. Well they had to depend on each other. And you could leave the door open even if you left reaching home. Never locked a door. Were the mostly Swedes now living in this neighborhood? Were there, what you call, Americans? Yeah, I think they're all over now. Yeah, but not yet at that time. At that time we were all Swedish. All Swedish. Oh yeah. I'll never forget when my folks, not my folks, but Esther's mother, there was an Italian lady that had bought a flat across the county corner from her on 3rd Avenue and she just about died of a heart attack because she thinks an Italian was moving into the neighborhood. But my aunt learned to eat up those words of... That lady proved to be her best friend and when she would all... she was so good to my aunt, you just couldn't believe. She just was one of the most marvelous neighbors ever. So my aunt learned it... The hard way. Yeah, she learned the hard way. It doesn't matter what nationality, it's just the individual. But wasn't it a case that they were protective, the people that came from Sweden, I mean for something that was unusual? Well I guess that... They didn't look the same. Yeah, and they were just a little leery, you know. Maybe that's why they all stayed healthy, I don't know. Maybe that's why we didn't need more than a sugar pill doctor. When you got old enough now to date boys, what happened then? I mean you could have come home with an Italian boy. Oh, I wouldn't have dared. I don't know if I would have wanted to even, but I don't think... I know I wouldn't have dared. You know, a lot of us take different turns. Oh yeah, now they even take different colors. I would never have dared. My father was a very strict disciplinarian. Oh, he was the one in the family then? Oh, you better believe he was a strict disciplinarian, yeah. So you could talk to mother then about certain things to eat more easily. Yeah, I could never talk to dad, no. He was a stubborn Swede, we always called him. So what he said is what it was then. What he said was it. But I never was interested either, but I would never have dared. So when you met this young lad, Russell, how did you meet him? In church or...? That was a strange thing. I was with my friend, who's... What was it, her aunt? Yeah, her aunt. There was a singing group that was meeting up at Rock Lake. And Russell was with his... well, he was in the singing group, I think. What was that group? String band. Gus Bure, string band. Yeah, weren't you in the group then? Yes, I was in the group. And he was up there, and I went with my friend whose aunt was up there, and I met him up there at Rock Lake. You never met the foreign lady? No. You lived too far away then to... Well, yeah, he lived way out in Eastmoreland and I lived in town. Oh, I see. So how long did you go together now before you told your mother about it? You didn't tell your father at first, though? No, I... But he was part Swedish, you know, that probably helped. Yeah, that helped, that sure helped. Did you point that out to your mother when you introduced him, or...? No, I didn't know about that about him at first, did I? No, no. I didn't know that he came from Swedish descent. Did he talk Swedish to your mother right away? Do you remember that? I can't remember that. Oh, I had you... write to him. No restrictions then? No, no. We went together, we were engaged for two years before we were married. But I guess we'd only gone together for not quite a year when he gave me the diamond, but then we were engaged for two years. And then you were married. In church, of course. And you met Mr. Johnson. What did you meet him, Noah, her father? What did you say at first? Do you remember that meeting? No, no, I can't remember that. No, I can't either. No, I can't remember that. I don't remember the time that I met him at all. I know that in 1936, I think we had our first date, didn't we? We went up to that same lake where we met, and I don't recall when I went there whether I talked to her father or not. I don't know. I don't either. But at least you didn't hear it. If it had been anything bad, I would have remembered it. So I think everything went along fine, I guess. You had a car then at that time? Yes. Yes, I did, yes. And what kind of work were you doing then? At that time, I was working in a veneer factory, too. Oh, I see. Furniture. Furniture factory, yes, I was working in a veneer department. So you're Swedish back then, it's on your mother's side? Yes. And your mother's parents gave over, your morfara and mormor? Yes. Did you call them mormor and morfar? No, I called them grandpa and grandma. But you had to talk Swedish to them, though? Oh, yes. I spoke Swedish mostly to them. They were not able to understand English? Oh, yes, they understood English, but it was much easier, you know. For them to explain themselves. So I spoke Swedish exclusively. I didn't have very many people to talk English to because my mother spoke Swedish, too. We all lived together, mother, grandfather, and grandparents. We all lived together. How old were they when they came over then? Did they came with your mother? Well, I don't remember. I have it all written down here. I have all the certificates and everything here. And my grandfather came directly from Sweden to Rockford. And my grandmother came directly from Sweden to Rockford, too. So they were up in the 450s, same age when they came? I think they were younger than that. Younger? Because they came separately, and then they got married after they were in Rockford a while. And my grandmother had brothers and sisters living here at the time that she came. She lived over on 6th Avenue. Sandstrom, his name was. And my grandfather came. He had a brother here, an older brother. And somehow or another, my grandfather and grandmother met. And my grandfather joined the Salvation Army, Swedish Salvation Army. Thank you. So you joined the string band then after a while. I joined the string band, I think, in 1936. I think I joined the string band, Gutsberg String Band. And I played with them for a couple of years, I guess. And you went around then for different tours to other cities, like the Moline? Yes, we went. I can remember going up to Wisconsin and playing in various places in Wisconsin. And it was all Swedish at the time? Yes, we all sung. We sung a few English songs, too, but mostly Swedish. You all heard Birk på kryddan, Kristus, Grunden den är gul. Stuff like that, you know. My brother went to Sweden one time. He brought home a lot of Swedish books, songs, string band songs. And we sang a lot of them. And then we sang an awful lot of English songs, too. So we sang about half and half, I think. That was in 1936 then? Yes, 1936. When you were a teenager. Yes, when I was born. And when we were married, we were married in 1940. 1939. By 1936, I was singing. Do you remember the help the Salvation Army gave the people? They were hungry and suffering during the Depression. They had the soup lines. Yes. Were the Salvation the only group that did that? Or how about the other churches, the Lutherans and the Methodists? Well, I don't remember them doing it, but they probably did. There was also the rescue mission. That's an old place. And I'm sure they did. And there must have been others, too. The Salvation Army, that's the one that people remember best, though. They don't seem to have... They're not the only ones that really did stuff like that. Yes, you see, the Red Cross did, too. But the Red Cross demanded almost your pedigree almost before you could do it. And there were restrictions. The Salvation Army had no restrictions. If you were hungry, they fed you. They didn't ask you a lot of questions. They fed you if you were hungry. And if you needed clothes, they'd give you clothes. If you were tired and needed a place to sleep, well, they furnished that for you. That's why the Salvation Army enjoyed such a reputation, because they didn't demand anything. They didn't order lines. No, they didn't have any restrictions. They just let you. So the other group didn't feed any stray dogs, then. You've got to have, like you said, the pedigree. Yeah, yeah. No stray dogs, no. Well, they weren't that bad, but they did seem to ask an awful lot of questions, and they'd turn some people down sometimes. The Salvation Army didn't turn anybody down. It's amazing, though, how they could continue for so many years, from the 30 to all the way up to the 18. They still do a lot of... Yes. They were able to get the funding. Well, they get the funding from outside. One thing about the Salvation Army is that they take funding from everybody. They don't believe in dirty money, like some organizations, they wouldn't take any money if it were made by a beer company, for instance. They wouldn't take money from a beer company. The Salvation Army, the money is accepted regardless of where it came from. Money was money, and money was neutral, you know. Like one of the preachers said the other day over the radio, he said, I don't care, he said, the devil has had his money long enough, now it's going to be our turn to use it for a while. So he took it. That's the way the Salvation Army has always felt. And they always had a good board that helped finance, too. They get good people with money on their boards, you know. Yes. It seems to me that the Salvation Army would be very neutral, though. I mean, every group seems to be able to congregate there. Yes. There are no discrimination. I mean, what kind of religion you practice or anything. Well, they did make one mistake once. They joined the National Council of Churches, which is a very liberal group, socialist, but they found out, they discovered it, their error, and now the Salvation Army has withdrawn from the National Council of Churches, which I am glad to hear, because I didn't care much to give to the Salvation Army, because part of that money went to the National Council of Churches. Now, of course, I don't, I still don't contribute to them, not because I don't like the Salvation Army, but because I have the highest respect for them. Why is it that makes the Salvation Army so popular with all church groups? Do you think it's the singing and the message or the help they provide? The sincerity. The sincerity. They are really sincere people. They practice what they preach. They really do. They can see the money is getting to use in the right place. Only when the National Council of Churches, you didn't know what happened to it. No, no, then we have no idea where the money went down there. They found the error. They discovered the error. How many years did they belong to it before they... Well, I was hoping you wouldn't ask me that, because I don't know that. And if I had known that you were going to come today, I would have prepared myself a little better. I would have probably dug in some of these papers and had some dates for you and everything. So how long did you belong to the String Band? I think it was about two years. Three years. Three years, maybe. And your grandparents, they belonged to it until they died? Well, my grandparents didn't belong to the String Band, no. No, but I mean they belonged to the Salvation Army. Oh, yeah, they belonged to the Salvation Army. Your mother, too? No. My grandfather, mostly. My grandfather was an officer in the Salvation Army. He became an officer of the Salvation Army. Not because he had any training, but because of voluntary... Voluntary officer. My grandmother always went. She went to the suffragetting. And I remember I always liked to go to the suffragetting because the kids could run around and romp around and do things they wanted to do. I remember one time I was in the suffragetting, and then the officers had a meeting. And somehow or another, the officers all sat down in the chairs, and surrounded me, and I couldn't get out. And they were having a meeting, and I thought I'd wait until they were through, and then I'd get out of there. But no sir, they kept on and on and on. Finally I got up, and I said, Will you please excuse me? And one of the officers got up and said, Why, certainly, he said. He said, I wish more of the people around here were courteous, to ask me to be excused when they're going to leave the meeting. He said, most of them just leave. I said, well, I just couldn't get out until I had him moved. And that was quite a joke in our family for a long time. Was it a dilemma there? Yeah. No. So you went to weekly meetings then with your grandpa and grandma? Yes, I went to Sunday school, the Salvation Army Sunday school. It was there that I came to the Lord, knew the Lord. And your mother, did she belong to it too? No, she didn't belong to the Salvation Army. My mother, kind of in the background, she wasn't against it, and she wasn't either against it or for it, but she just didn't. She was just not very religious. She sang in the choir at Emanuel Lutheran Church. Well, when she was young, when she was a young girl, yeah. How about your father-in-law? Did he die early or? He just died in 1950 somewhere. He just left the family. I see. So you didn't grow up with him. Yes. So I didn't enjoy the fellowship of the father. All I had was my grandfather. And you were the only son? Yes. Well, I had my other brother and sister too from my mother's later marriage. I see. But my brother has died now. He died last February the 10th. And my sister is still living in Chicago. So you are the last one to know? Yes. The last boy living then? Yes. So my son then will be the last cockerel from our family. He will be the last one. It doesn't look like he's going to have any children either. No, he's not married. He better not. How about your family? Did they observe the Swedish customs? Yes, we did. We ate the kruppkakor. Kruppkakor? So that means that one of them came from Ölanden? No. Småland? No. My grandfather was a Dalarin. Dalarin? I've seen a lot of kruppkakor out there. Well, I had a half a Dalarin here and I just loved kruppkakor. And I wish I had one right now. And then in Idlogsfjell we ate smörgåsbord. It seems like most of our meals were like smörgåsbord. Incidentally, I had smörgåsbord in Korea. It sure looked like a smörgåsbord, but it was no smörgåsbord. It tasted like Korean. But we had risgrönsgröt and knäckebröd and bunost. So did your grandmother do the baking then? My grandmother didn't do much baking like Mrs. Johnson. She didn't do that much baking. She did bake all right, but not that often. It was always a little cheaper to buy bread, loaf of bread. Bread was less than ten cents a loaf. And I don't know if you could make it any cheaper than that. No, but it was better for you. You knew what was in it. My mother always did. I know what I'm putting in it. Did she put in a lot of rye or wheat? It was rye, a lot of rye. The dark bread then? A lot of rye. She didn't make the wrong cake? Only loaves? No, just loaves. It was easier to make sandwiches for lunches. Because when we all went to school and Dad went to work, we all had lunches. And of course when we worked, she always made our lunch for us. What did you have to drink then? Did you all drink coffee? Yeah, we all drank coffee. Or milk, either one. Either milk or coffee. Yeah, we were brought up on coffee. How about customs of the Christmas? How long before Christmas did you bring in the Christmas tree? Do you remember that? I'm not so sure how long before. There was a few days before, probably a week or so before. As soon as we got close to Christmas, things started getting exciting. A lot of Christmas shopping, all the excitement about Christmas. We brought in a tree. We had this little clip-on candles. We didn't have electric, so we clipped the candles on. And then we lit the tree and lit the candles. And I never heard of any houses burning down. But now if you did it, you'd be arrested for doing it. You're getting sent home, I understand? Yes. I can never remember any place burning down because of Christmas tree. We were six kids and there's still... I heard a Christmas tree falling down, but all they did was pinch all the candles, you know, and nothing ever burned. But was that Christmas tree standing in a colder room, though? Yeah, usually in the corner of a room. In the fine room, as they call it. Or in the parlor or... We always observed Christmas, exchanged presents on Christmas Eve. Did you have Santa Claus come? Oh, yeah, we had Santa Claus. Who was the grandpa? My grandmother was Santa Claus one time, I remember. The other times I don't remember, but I remember one time my grandmother told me, you know, there is no Santa Claus. And I said, oh, yes, there is. Don't you remember the time that I heard some noise out on the porch and I went out and looked and there was Christmas presents on the porch? And she said that was me. She said, stamping my foot on it. That's her way of telling me that there was no Santa Claus. So I found out then that there's no such thing as Santa Claus. We never had Santa Claus at our house. No, I don't teach my children anything. We don't teach our children anything that we had to unteach them later on. So we taught them that there's no Santa Claus. But we told them that if they wanted to believe in Santa Claus, if other kids wanted to believe in Santa Claus, don't try to spoil it for them. Let them believe the way they want to believe and just be content in knowing in your own mind that there is no such Santa Claus. But don't try to spoil it for them. I think it worked. I don't think they ever spoil anybody's Christmas. We used to walk to Yuletown. Yuletown was a good mile. Yuletown is about a good four or five miles. How early in the morning was that, 7 or 8? We had 5 o'clock in the morning we were at church. My dad would take and whatever kids were able to go, we all walked in the snow in the street. Of course, there were no cars, so we walked in the street all the way down from Chicago Avenue all the way down. You could just walk the street to church every Yuletown morning. That was about two miles, I think, was that one way. It was two miles. We did walk home again afterwards. You had Christmas presents the night before? Christmas Eve. Christmas Eve was ours. How about you? Same. We would celebrate Christmas Eve for giving out presents. Then we would go to church on Sunday morning. Christmas morning, yeah. Then, of course, we always had a big Christmas dinner on Christmas Day. Then my aunt and cousins were over. They were the only relation we had in mind. You get mixed up now between the two families if you keep interchanging what happens. That's all right. I understand what you mean. Your family, what kind of relation did they have? I mean, the grandparents were here. Yes. Your mother, did she have any other sisters or brothers here in Rockport? Yes, my mother had a brother. A brother. His name was Roy Wicklund. Roy Wicklund? Yes. Your grandparents named him Wicklund? Yes. My grandfather came from Sweden. When he was living in Sweden, his name was John Wicklund. Then when he came here, he changed it to Andrew Wicklund. So a lot of the people still call him John. Most everybody called him John, I guess. He had an awful time changing it. Why did he change his first name? I don't know. John was better than Andrew. I thought... More American. Yes. He was better than Andrew, but he changed it to Andrew. A-N-D-R-O. I don't know. Maybe it wasn't as popular as we think it is. We think it was popular then, but maybe he didn't like it. I don't know why he changed it. That's what makes it so difficult to find your Swedish descendants in Sweden. Because they change their names, and we don't know what their names were before they changed them, unless they told you. My grandparents, I never thought of asking them or anything like that. So you have no idea where they came from in Sweden, then? Well, my grandmother used to say that she came from... She used to talk about the Mälaren in Stockholm. So she knew a little about the Mälaren. So I assumed that she lived in Stockholm. My grandfather, I heard him say that he was from the north, in the Dalarna country. He was from that part of the country. But I wish I knew. I've been talking to all my relatives, and they don't know anything about the religious or the immigration aspects of my grandparents at all. They don't know anything about it. So I'm just up in the air concerning it. I don't know. I wish I could find out. Did they go back to Sweden at any time, your grandparents? No, they never did. My grandmother always wanted to, and it was always her big dream to go back to Sweden. I remember I felt so bad, because when she was on her deathbed, she said, Well, it looks like I'm not going back to Sweden, she said. And of course that made me very sad, you know, to think that she lived all her life in hopes to go back there, and never getting the chance to do it. Did she correspond with the people in Sweden, do you remember? She did for a while. And my mother's cousins, my second cousins, they corresponded for a while with Sweden. Then they dropped loose. Hi, Russ. They cut loose from the correspondence, too. So they... So they never got the chance to go back then? No, they never got a chance to go back. My grandfather didn't express any real desire to go back. It was my grandmother that wanted to do it. She wanted... My grandmother had some sisters here, and... Did my folks want to go back? No. No one was interested at all? No. Their son, Russel. Oh, that's their son, yeah. Was there political activity in all, your grandparents, your grandpa, for instance? Was he unable to take part in the newspapers and reading what's going on? Yes, he... When he went to Iraq, was there a socialist government there? He was, well, not socialist, democratic, which was probably the same thing. He was a democrat? Yes, he was a republican, and then he changed to democrat. Roosevelt, I guess Roosevelt... It seemed like he liked some of Roosevelt's policies, and both he and my uncle... They changed, then? They changed. And my uncle then ran for a few offices in Rockford on the county. Roy Wickland. He ran for a few offices in Rockford. He never did get elected to anything. Was he on the same line as Megger Blum then, or Hallström? Yeah, well, Hallström was an independent, and Blum, I think, was independent, too. But they were liberal. They ran as independents, I think, but they were liberal because down in the heart they were democrats. So Blum, I guess, and Hallström, their re-election was assured because most people voted along that line. Which one was the better of the two, Hallström or Blum? Well, I don't remember that because that was... I do remember when Blum was elected and re-elected, and I remember when Hallström was in office, too. But how good they were... How good could any liberal be in any way? I don't know. They've got to be tough to do so good. Well, liberals, you know, they love to spend money liberally. And when they're in office, you can always be sure that the taxes are high. But then there are such things as liberal republicans, too. In fact, probably some of the republicans are just as liberal as the democrats, or even more so. So you can't say that republicans are conservative and that democrats are liberal. They're liberal on both sides of the fence. Unless you're a real conservative, then you at least try to cut down spending as much as possible. So Roosevelt, now, was he a popular among the people? Oh, yeah, he was quite popular. He was accepted as a salvationist, I mean, to save the people from the Depression. There were lots of people I know when I was working. Lots of people would... a number of people, not a lot of them, but a number of people would come and tell me that you can't keep priming the pump all the time. There comes a time when you've got to expect water, and the water comes out. Because if you keep priming the pump all the time, you're going to run out of prime water. So that was Roosevelt's idea of getting... Sustaining. Yeah, he wanted to get... He wanted to get... Get it started. Get everything started. He thought that by doing that, he would prime the pump. So he started the Corps of Workers, you know, and paid them public works, you know. And they'd get out and they'd plant trees, and they'd fix roads, and they'd do this and that. And they'd get paid by the taxpayers to pay that. Well, the reason he did that was so that he was priming the pump. Well, you can't always prime the pump. You've got to stop. You can't prime the pump all the time. That's right. Over a hundred. Yes. And you saw, you know, the WPA workers, you know, there was a story going around about them, that there was about 20 of them got hurt one day because one fellow's shovel handle broke. Too many bumps there. One fellow was leaning on the shovel handle, and the shovel handle broke, and 20 of them got hurt, and they fell down. I suppose there are always rumors and stories about it. Oh, it was just a story. It never happened. But it was a story anyway. But you were lucky then to keep working during the Depression. Well, I got a job in a furniture factory. Empire? Where? Empire or something? No, this was a furniture factory down on Seminary Street, Winnebago Furniture Company. I worked there for a number of years, for two years, I guess, or three maybe. You were not unionized during that time? No, I won't join the union. I never joined a union in my life. No, but at that time, don't you think it was necessary to have a union? They said they were running the workers hard and security. Sure. I don't think it was necessary because if you were having a little trouble, then they'd strike, and you wouldn't have any work anyway, so you could just as well be out of work just to be striking. And then if you do get a raise, well, then that was offset by the time you spent on strike. If you were on strike, you were saved three months on strike. Well, all that, you're not getting paid at all. So that's my philosophy. I would never join a union because they were troublemakers. And they would have everything go along smoothly, and they'd stir it up and get animosity created just so that they could put on their strikes. And that's happened in some cases. I don't say it happened in all cases, but in most cases I think that was true. But how did they get the raise, though, if they didn't have a union or any leverage against the management? You quit. You quit and go work somewhere else. Yeah, but it was probably hard to get a job, though, during the 30s. Well, it wasn't easy. So a lot of people worked for 35 and 40 cents an hour during the Depression. They worked that way. Some of them got it, went up to 50 and 60 cents, depending on your skill. But if you were a real skilled worker and you had a trade, you know, like a printer, or if you were a toolmaker, you got a little more money because you were skilled. But just the general workers, they got up to 60 cents an hour. They were doing pretty well during the Depression when I was working. Then I went to work at American Cabinet Harbor Company. It's called Amarok now. I went to work there, and I worked there for six years. I was married when I worked at Amarok. There was Aldine in the company. Aldine, yes. And they were quite fair to a certain degree. But then I – But there was some sort of union, though, wasn't there? No union there, no. No union. No union, because I wouldn't work there for a union. Then they tried to get the union in several times, but it failed because the union couldn't help them any. I did quit, though, the Aldine Company, because when I – when the war was over, then I quit and went to work for Woodward Governor Company. And when I quit, they paid the bonus the next day at the American Cabinet Harbor. And I had worked there all those years, you know, and they didn't pay me my bonus, which I had already earned, you know. But they didn't pay me that. So – but when I started at Woodward Governor Company, they paid the bonus the first day I worked there. So I got a bonus the first day I worked – just for working there one day. And then I didn't work that day. I was just hired, and then my shift went to work three days later, see. But as long as I was hired on that day, I got a bonus. I didn't get a bonus at the American Cabinet Harbor, although I suppose if I had gone down and argued with them, they would have paid me because they were generally fair in the things that they did, but I didn't ask them for it. They were generally fair in whatever they did. So Woodward Governor, they were liberal in their – No, no, they were conservative. Woodward was conservative. They were? Oh, yes. They were very – How come they didn't pay you a dividend immediately, I mean a bonus, without even asking for it? Well, it's because it's policy, their honesty. It was policy. You see, if I was hired that day, well, then I'm on a payroll. I didn't get as much as a man who worked there for 20 years, so I didn't get that much. But I did get a bonus, see. And that's just because of honesty. It's a matter of honesty and fairness. Their policy was to do that, so that's what they did. Evidently, the American Cabinet of Harvard forgot their policy or didn't realize that I had quit on the same day that the bonus was paid. But anyway, I got a bonus anyway, so I was happy with it. So you worked there? So I worked there until I retired seven years ago. And there was Mr. Torsell, he was one of the presidents, wasn't he? Walter Thorell. Oh, Thorell, yeah. Thorell, yes. And he was the president for a few years, he was vice president for a long time.