 February 11, 1987, I'm sitting together with Robert. Wait up, it's the 12th today, isn't it? Is it 12th? Yeah, let me look. Any changes? Yeah, it's the 12th, yeah. Very good. All right. And Robert Boren was born 1905, July 5, in Rockford, Illinois. Right. And both your parents, no, your mother was three years old when she came. And your father was born here. Yeah, and my father's folks came over before the Civil War. About 1860, maybe. Oh, that early? Mm-hmm. And my mother's folks came over, let's see, they came over about, let's see, she was three years old and she was born in 1867. So she came in 1870. Yeah. 1870. Do you know where she came from in Sweden? Do you know the place? By golly, I can't say that offhand. I'm sorry to say I could look it up, but I don't know offhand. I mean, it might take a long time. I should know, but some of it's hard. But she came from Sweden, and where's her parents? Yeah, the way they worked it, my mother's dad and my granddad, he'd come over first. Wanted to get the lay of the land. Then a year later, he sent for him, and he stayed here. So my grandmother, my mother used to say once in a while, gee, that must have been an awful job for her mother, that'd be my grandmother, to take three little kids, no, four little kids over in the boat, you know. Mm-hmm. And lay of the land, was he a farmer then, or? Over there he was a farmer, yeah. Over there he was a farmer. And they came here, they came to Rockford? Yeah. According to my, I remember my mother told me this. In those days, they boarded the train, they wanted to go to the Middle West. Boarded the train, train only went to La Porte, Indiana. So my granddad, his name was Carl, Carl Magnuson, got a job on the railroad. Then a little later, he moved to Chicago. And she said that he got a, I suppose, or naturally, you can't always find work. He got a job as sort of a doorman at some nice big hotel. But then, now I just don't know the date they finally came to Rockford, but I would say maybe, say they got to Chicago about 1870. I got an idea, and then they lived in there, La Porte. And then in Chicago. I got an idea they came to Rockford maybe 1880. And then he worked in the furniture factories. So he didn't become a farmer then? No, he didn't become a farmer in Rockford, no. His intention was not to be a farmer either, do you think? That I don't know. That I don't know, but I can tell you about my dad's father. He was a farmer too, but when he first came, he worked in the factories. Then I remember my dad told me, he got a farm out near Camp Grant. That's an army camp out this way. But he evidently had to give it up. And my dad mentioned, your granddad, my dad, it broke his heart. Because he lost, I suppose, maybe just like farmers, they had a mortgage on the farm and he couldn't pay it, and they lost it. This Camp Grant, how early was it established out there? It's close to the airport today. That's right. What kind of camp was it? It was an army camp, World War I. Naturally, when the United States went to war, they had to build up their army. They only had a small army of maybe 75,000 at that time, a regular army. So there was no Camp Grant then before World War II? No. Or World War I? No. And they established it out here. Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. So that's how they started. And they had prisoners there too? During World War II, certain German prisoners were sent over to Camp Grant. Was it active all the way from World War I to World War II? Or was it standing still in between? In between. Like a national guard? In between. I think they used it occasionally for national guard training. But it was more or less dead, I think, between World War I, when it was over. Then they re-established it again in World War II. Do you remember if the barracks were still there in the 1930s or 20s? Oh, I remember as a kid, you see, we used to go out there and watch them drill. And they had a remount station. And they'd break the horses and the cowboys and all that stuff. And some of the barracks remained for a number of years. Excuse me, I'll get the umbrella. Your dad, no. He was the general manager of Scandia. Right. For many years. 1890, 1895? Yep, maybe to 1922. Then he had a, you know, I think, P.A. Peterson. Naturally, like, I think my dad, P.A. had a falling out. And I never did find the exact reason. But P.A. Peterson had a, I think it was a son-in-law by the name of Jack Foley. I think he married P.A.'s, I think P.A. had two adopted daughters. Jack married one of them. So Jack, he was a sort of a salesman on this. When I was running this Spiros Wood, he'd come out. And he'd always like to talk about P.A.'s father-in-law and about my dad. And he said, I think he knew himself that there was sort of a difference of opinion. But Jack said, P.A. Peterson always said your dad was a good man. I suppose he meant as a worker and as a businessman and so on. But he said they're both strong characters. And maybe they didn't want to give in to one another. Anyway, so P.A. and my dad did have a falling out. And the exact reason, I don't know. He was probably looking up to P.A. Peterson as being the second P.A. Peterson. Why was he even not together all this well? I think just because he was able to borrow money. And I suppose he got dividends. He was a stockholder in Scandia. He was a stockholder. I just don't know if he was a big stockholder. I think he was a stockholder. Yeah, sure he was. Because he was taking care of the books. So he knew exactly what to do, in other words, what to come up with if it were a strong enough company. Yeah, but. He had the inside track. Yeah. Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. And P.A. didn't want to dismiss him, of course, because he was a good bookkeeper and he was doing his job. Yes. Was he also like a salesman, then your dad, for like the Rockford Mantle, you said he worked there for a while? Well, my dad was, I don't think he ever went out in the road as a salesman. But my dad always emphasized, I think, too much the sales end of it and not the production end of it. And because I worked with him at the old ornamental. That's another thing that he went into. I can tell you about that later. This was after 1931. That was in. Yeah, yeah. And so my dad was a great letter writer. And he would write his letters longhand. I remember old Hugo Olson criticizing. I didn't like it, but I didn't say anything. Oh, your dad should dictate his letters. Well, he did it in a nice way. But the system that my dad had, he'd write out longhand and he'd keep a girl busy all day typing letters. And he could do it quick. And the reason I say it's a better system for him, he had a lot of business associates and they would come over and ask him advice or help or whatever and just think if he was dictating the letter, he'd have to stop. The girl would have to leave. But right in longhand, he could just stop right there and then go back to it. But anyway, so he wrote letters to his sales representatives all over the country. And he'd get a wire from New York City, from a sale drive. You better come to New York. And that was another thing that I admire about my dad. Just think, a family of seven. And then later, my mother's sister lived with us. And he was able to make quick decisions and get away. And it must not have been easy for him. They wanted him in New York City, he'd go there. And so on. He hopped on the train then. Hopped on the train, yeah. That's right. And then he had to be away then a week or two. That's right. That's right. So he was actually out and organizing sales and. Yeah, that's right. But he did it mainly by correspondence. I mean, he didn't, well, I suppose he did maybe like he went into the furniture mart in Chicago or Grand Rapids when they had that every year and stayed there. But you see, Scandia was a large company at that time. A large. Was it a main line or was it a bedroom furniture or dining room or was it? Come under the classification of case goods, which would be dining room, bedroom furniture. But then I think they had a certain item that sold like hot cakes. Some sort of a cabinet. But I don't remember exactly what it was like, but they did very good on that too. So your dad, and he was old enough to be with the Scandia in 1893 when the big depression hit. See, he was born in 65. 93 would make him 28 years old. I got an idea. As I recall, maybe he started with Scandia, I think it was 1895. Because P.A. Peterson, he took over a lot of factories then that tumbled down. How was he able, now P.A. Peterson, to take those risks? Nobody else did. Well, same way that my dad used to do on a little later date. You see, P.A. Peterson, I think, was not too much difference, maybe 15 years difference. Maybe when my dad started business, say he was 25, P.A. then might have been 35 or 40. But P.A. was a gambler, and he was able to work it out the same way my dad did for many years. He was broke two or three times, they used to tell me. But he always made a comeback. And I suppose it was because he was able to borrow money in an emergency. He borrowed money? No, he was a director of the People's Bank that closed during the Depression. But he would borrow at any one of the banks. But later on, of course, he lost that during the Depression. So they caught up with him, in other words. That's right. Was he depressed then, when you got older, I mean, making a loss? Like, do you think that the roof would cave in on you? How was he as a man? Did he show it when he came home for you kids now and your mother? Because he would know, of course, through the books, that something was going to come on here. Well, I remember as a kid, people would write, oh, your dad was wonderful to his family and his friends and his associates, which is true. But I don't think he didn't play with it. I remember I had a twin brother. At six years old, he gave us a pony. Boy, he was the best pony in the world, really. And baseball uniform, gloves, everything like that, but I don't think he really, he was so busy. And probably my mother didn't like it. And I remember we lived on Spafford Avenue, which was about a block from the Sunbird Funeral Home. So the family had grown on. I have a new house. This big house was for sale. My mother said, another old-timer said, well, your dad and mother were pretty good that way. They talked things over. So my dad said, well, we've got that big house over there, and we'll need it. It's for sale. And so she said, well, I'll agree to it if you don't work so hard. Because he worked early and late, and I suppose he'd take stuff home. And I suppose I didn't, as a kid, didn't know anything about married life. And I suppose like any wife, they might have bothered or something. But I never heard him argue, hardly, never raised his voice. So that my dad showed admirable courage during the Depression. As I say, he didn't drive. I went to half a dozen people with him, so he tried to raise money. I remember he went out to old CJ Swenson. He was a superintendent of Luxandia. And my dad didn't think he was too good a superintendent, but they were friends. And I remember we went out there. No, I didn't. That's right. I went out with my brother. My dad wasn't along. And Carl Swenson said, your dad's a type of a fellow that likes to see the wheels of turn. But as far as I think I knew it, too, and my brother, it was hopeless in the Depression. No one had any money. You just couldn't get it. If my dad had been able to get any money, I bet he'd pull through. But he wasn't able to. And then the banks closed, and the receivers, it was their job to collect all money, all loans. So they put my dad into bankruptcy. It was involuntary. It wasn't a voluntary bankruptcy. They put him into bankruptcy. He had 2,000 shares of stock. I think it was at either the First National or the Manufacturing National Bank. And actually, they took it and sold it. My dad went and said, I wonder who got that stock. I don't think he ever did find out. So my dad was one of the originators of the, he went into the machine tool business, not as a manager, but as a stockholder. He was the original president of Rockford Milling Machine. And that combined with the Rockford Tool, which then later became the Sunstrand Company. Why did he diversify like that? You would think he would stay with the furniture business alone. But the PAs did it the same way. Oh, yeah, PA. To protect yourself, you think, themselves? I think maybe. My dad and PA and others probably realized that the furniture business wasn't quite as lucrative as a machine tool. Was the peeling off the furniture already in the 20s? I think it was. I think they could see that. I think they could see that. Because he got the order book, and he also knew how much was going out. But from 1890s, now when he started in this furniture business with Scandia, and as a manager and stockholder, of course, it was pretty good times then up to 1920s. I would say probably. Because the furniture factories made little money. There were no strikes or anything like that. No unions? No. Harry West, he's an old time furniture man. He has a standard. A standard, yeah. He made the criticism that the old furniture fellows, they wanted to declare dividends every year. I suppose you can't blame them. They did not leave enough in reserve. And I believe that's probably justified. For the furniture things and machinery. Yeah, that's right. That's right. They depleted them. So my dad went into a different world. Then he became, you know, the furniture factories needed glass for their furniture. My dad was instrumental in bringing the National Mirror Works to Rockford. And he was the one that hired Oli Nelson to be manager. And Oli was the one that started Rockford Products, Screw Products. Became a million. He's dead now. So my dad was in a number of things. So he was able then to get quite a few dollars up to the Depression. I remember when the night that I guess he was, he heard that the banks were going to put him into bankruptcy. How did he know that? How did he get that news? Well, I suppose first of all, they would contact him. And he'd just say, I haven't any money. And anyway, oh, then of course, Mr. BB, no, was it BB Early? One of the early brothers was my dad's attorney. Yeah, BB Early. Yeah. And he said, the BB Early said he didn't commit an act of bankruptcy. So all the attorneys had a meeting. And they all agreed. Technically, he did not commit an act of bankruptcy. And in other words, he could have favored some creditor. And I think they thought maybe my dad favored old John P. Lundell, who was one of my dad's partners. And I think my dad said he was a good one. In Scandia or at the bank? What did you say? At the bank or in Scandia? At the bank. At the bank. Yeah, at the bank. One of the trustees. Yeah. And so I remember, oh, then BB Early said, I guess my dad said, well, if I did not commit an act of bankruptcy, they can't do it. Of course, I guess eventually they could have because he couldn't pay his debts. But BB Early said, you're on so many notes. And you're so deep in, you better let it go through. And I remember that night, my dad called my brother, I think two or three of my brothers. And he said, here, a fortune, I don't know if you use the word fortune, but he says it's worth a million and a half is going to be all lost. And of course, a million and a half then would be many more a million now. And he cooperated with it. He had to make his file, his report and everything. And so he cooperated with him. But it's remarkable how well he was able to stand up, I think. It was just remarkable. This guy, you know, they suggested to him that he should have written some over on his wife, your mother's. Why didn't he think of that, though? Because that was legally correct. Oh, yeah. Yeah. I think it would still today, of course. That's right. Was that done during the Depression or before the Depression, you think, in some cases? Like P.A. Peterson, he was dead already at that time. Yep. Yep. He died in 27. His stockholders or heirs, they didn't know something during the Depression. Or did they? Well, but what's? What happened? That's a remark my dad, I heard him make. He never talked about P.A. But one time he said, I wonder. I remember he said that something about, I wonder how P.A. would have come out if he was living today during this Depression. How? Maybe you've got to give Barney Flynn, who was looked after the Peterson estate, credit. Because anyway, he safeguarded it some way. How? I don't know. Because his wealth was intact for the heirs to collect later on. Yes. They were millionaires many times over. Yes, that's right. And your father, now, he worked the same methods like him. Well. Who was this guy now that mentioned that your dad was one of the three big ones here in Rockford? What was his name? You mentioned it earlier. Yes, I remember, as a young fellow, we used to go out to Island Park and dance on a Saturday night, staggered. And there were three or four of us sitting, and we were just talking. And I was surprised. And this one guy said, your dad is one of the three wealthiest men in Rockford. I think, I suppose, PA was one. Oh, the other one was Atwood, out at Atwood and Machine. Yeah, that's right. He was an Englishman or? Yeah. But there were two Swedes on the top. I think so. I think so. I think so. I think, as I recall. Because your dad probably picked up some ideas from the bookkeeping of PA Peterson's dealings and ownership of stocks and so on. Yeah. But you wonder about that. Why Faust, for instance? He went to Lebanon. Yes, that's right. He lost all of it. That's right. So what kind of mistake did he make? Well, I think he was something like my dad. He'd make investments. He started the, he financed the Rockford Steel Furniture. But it went broke. And I used to know the superintendent, old, what was his name? Olsen was his firm. But he was quite a, but anyway, it didn't succeed. And then the Faust Hotel, I think naturally Mr. Faust was the, I think the main guy there. He was the main guy. And they named it after him. And he lost money there. So that's the way it went. What happened to him? Did he die during the Depression or? I remember, let's see now, I remember very well. Someone come over to the, that's when I was, when my dad owned the old ornamental brass, which was a competitor of National Rock and Amrock. He said, Mr. Levine Faust is sick. My dad said something about, gee, I should go over and see him. So I don't remember the year, but I got an idea the Faust must have died, latter part of the Depression. Maybe 36 or 7 or 8 or something like that. And he was a poor man at the time, wasn't he? I think he was. I remember Levine Faust used to come over one time. My dad wasn't there. And of course, you know, you can't believe everything you see. He said, your dad was a wonderful man. And so on. And yeah, Faust, I knew a lot of those old, I mean, I didn't know him well. I didn't know P.A. though. But I knew Faust, to speak to him. Robert Lynn, John Lundell, Knutson, and Oly Nelson, Hoagland. Hoagland, that was Susskind. No, that's National Rock. National Rock, Hoagland. Oh, I want to tell you about Frank Hoagland and my dad. As young fellows, they were friends, good friends. Kind of buddies, I guess. I guess they both belonged to the First Lutheran. My dad wasn't, I wouldn't say he was too much of a church member, but anyway, he was. So, oh, you know, old Frank, he was a capable fellow. But he could be tyrannical and so on. And there was an awful scrap to retain who was to be in command at Lockhamny. Old Landstrom, he was trying to get the job away from Hoagland. But anyway, Hoagland went out. He went out. He retained his control. You mean Landstrom of the Landstrom Furniture? Yes. Was he? Oscar. Yeah, Oscar. Was he also in the National Rock? Well, he was probably a minor stockholder. But then he had a friend, Johnson, and the two of them, they worked together, and they tried to get Hoagland out of there as a manager who had the controlling stock. So Hoagland went to my dad and explained the situation. I've got to raise $75,000 or I'm going to lose control. I don't know if that was maybe the Mississippi Valley Bank down in St. Louis or what. My dad said, sure, I'll help you get $25,000. And so he got, I don't know who raised the other $50,000, but Hoagland got his $75,000, and he was able to retain control. And so I remember my dad was a great one for writing letters, even on small notes or messages. And Hoagland wrote and thanked, dear friend Will, appreciate your help, and so on. But when my dad, you see, Robert Lynn started this ornamental brass competitor lock company just to furnish hardware to his own factories, the Rockford Chair and Furniture and a couple others. And it didn't get any place. It was a little bit of an outfit. So my dad, after he got, you know, my dad got when they sold the Sunstrand adding machine, my dad was president. He got $680,000. Was he the president of the? Of the adding machine. Of the division? Yes. Of Sunstrand? Sunstrand adding machine, yeah. So he had bought up stocks then and got some good footing in it? Yes. You see, he was a, the Rockford, the Sunstrand really came about through the Rockford Tool and the Rockford Milling. Rockford Mill, Rockford was a little bit of a machine shop. And then they combined. And then they went into the Sunstrand. So my dad was, I don't know if he was ever president of the, he was president of the Sunstrand adding machine. Now whether he was president of the Sunstrand machine tool, I'm not sure. But anyway, when they sold out, when the adding machine sold out to Elliot Fisher out east. In Connecticut. In Connecticut. My dad got $680,000. Then he got a rebate of $250,000. On top of that. From the Internal Revenue Department. Because he, old Barney Flynn said you looked into it. And he got, I think it was $250,000. It could have been a little more, a little less. And so, but anyway, I was talking about ornamental. So the ornamental brass became a competitor of Lock Company. And Holtland didn't like that. But they were still friends, I would say. And to help out his old friend Robert Lynn, my dad, I think he went into the ornamental brass. 1928, in a period of, I got us out of school in 29. And I went over with him. In a period of two or three or four years before the Depression, the crash was in 29, of course. Put in a sum of $254,000 into the ornamental brass to buy machinery and all that stuff. Depression come on. And I remember so well. Everyone else was cutting wages. My dad, I think his main characteristic was, he was an optimist. His idea was if you work hard enough and put enough money into a company, it'll succeed. So we didn't cut wages for maybe six months. And then finally had to. But my dad said, this won't last too long. And, but it did. It really, the Depression lasted from 30 through to 38 till the World War II almost. Almost, anyway. Very slight improvement. So that's what happened. There were $254,000 put into that in a period of two or three years. Oh, then old John Wester at the Rockford Peerless Furniture, someone from Moline came to him and said, Bennett Organ Company. I guess they weren't financially difficult. And Mr. Wester, his furniture factory, I think, was making organ cabinets. So they went to John Wester. And John Wester, he was a good friend of my dad. And I always liked him so much because when you know how things are, when you go downhill, people might maybe slight you a little bit. But Wester never did. So anyway, Mr. Wester said, you go over and see Mr. Broleen. So this man did, who was it, Mr. Bennett? Or was it Mr. One of the Finance the organization to come to Rockford? So he wrote to many of the leading businessmen, mostly on the east side or the Swedish. But he had some west siders. Mr. J.L. Clark of J.L. Clark Manufacturing was one of the best concerns in town. And I think some of them subscribed maybe 25,000. I think that's what my dad subscribed. Might have been more. And others, 25,000. And others, 10,000, and so on. I think Mr. Clark subscribed 25,000. But he's a smart businessman, Mr. Clark. And he probably thought it was a good thing. Well, then the crash of 29 came on, and the big depression started, so everything went bad. My dad chipped in his 25,000. Now, whether it was before the crash or after, I don't know. And others, probably the same. But many of them who subscribed, on account of the depression, no longer had the money. So they just didn't pay. And I remember my dad got kind of provoked at that. And he said, even though, like he says, Mr. Harold Clark said, your name is on a subscription list is just as good as a promissory note. So my dad was in favor of going after him anyway. But I think Mr. Flynn, who was Secretary, had been appointed Secretary. And my brother and I both told my dad, well, they're broke, the company's not going ahead. So finally, my dad, I think, dropped that. So the result was the company didn't go on. And I remember the manager down in Moline, what was his name, I can't remember. So they decided all we can do is liquidate the property, the machinery, equipment, and inventory down there. And Mr. Flynn took care of all that. But Leonard, the final outcome, oh, it was a complete loss to everyone. And I suppose some of the people that subscribed and went into it, they probably blamed my dad. But they shouldn't have, because he did his part. But it was one of those things that came up. You know, that was a bad depression. People didn't have any money anymore. So he tried to help out, and then he got the blame. That's right. That's right. I would say, well, I won't say everyone. Like Mr. Wester, he probably had a broad understanding of it, but a lot of them probably did blame my dad. Oh, I remember so well. I was over, after World War II, I started a little concern called the Peerless Wood Project. We made parts for furniture. And one day, we made moldings and dowel rods and dowel pins and wood hardware. Well, one day, this fellow come in. He was maybe 50, 60 years old, and he wanted some dowel rods. And he explained, he said, I'm sort of, he says, I'm not a manufacturer, but I'm connected with the organ business, and I need some dowel rods for repair of one thing or another. So then he, I didn't open up the subject. He said, say, there was a Mr. Lind that went into the organ business here, and he lost everything. Oh, I don't feel sorry for him. And you see, Mr. Lind, our Robert Lind, was a good friend of my dad, so I think this fellow just got the names mixed up. So in other words, I don't feel sorry for Mr. He was really referring to my dad. I didn't say anything, though. But that's the attitude some of them took, you know. The fact that my dad did his part and lost everything, oh, I don't feel sorry for him. You deserve that attitude. Yeah. So this organ company, was they connected, do you think, with some pastors being in it, being a salesman for this type of musical instrument? I imagine the different people, my dad included, might have spoken to the pastor of First Lutheran Church, but I'm not really up on that. But those organs were mainly for the churches. For the churches, the bigger units then. It was not for the home. Not for the home. But I don't think it was. Well, maybe they were going to have two lines, a small one for the home, and then the slightly bigger ones for the church. But I know they were going to have them for the church. And the whole operation was in Molina, Illinois. Yep. There was nothing manufactured in Rockford. They didn't even get off the ground. They didn't even, they were going to move the factory here and all that, but then that all fell through. When the Depression. They moved it to Rockford. They were going to, oh yeah, they were going to move the factory to Rockford. Oh yeah. They weren't going to operate down there. But here you already had the headdark, though, as an expert in the field. Was there for the average homeowner, headdark pianos, or? It was not organs. They were pianos. This was organs. Yeah, this was organs. Oh, so they would be different. And anyway, I think, I'm not sure about, it seemed to me, Haddorf, they had closed up by that time, I think. I'm not sure. But anyway, Haddorf was pianos, and this was organs. But it was before the Depression, this happened. Yes. Yes. I would say approximately, well, maybe the year 1927, 8, 9, and so on. Probably 28. Naturally, when you get things to get started. And the subscription list had been made out, and I guess there was no difficulty in that. You know, people, all right, we'll take a shot at it. But then the Depression come on, but Mr. Clark, he chipped in his 25. My dad did it, and probably Ole Nelson did, and probably John Wester, and so on. But a lot of them didn't. And I don't know if you can blame them, but anyway, that's what happened. Mm-hmm. There was one venture outside the city of Rockford that your father went into this organ business. But he also had another one further away, down in Arkansas. How did it? Well, the one in Arkansas, Helen, Arkansas, the local furniture manufacturers probably had some, well, I don't know if they had trouble getting lumber, but they figured, well, a lot of lumber down there. Let's start a mill, and we'll ship to the furniture factory at maybe a slightly reduced price. So I don't know how many, but Mr. Hoagland was in it, Mr. Robert Lynn, Mr. Lindell, Knutson, and maybe Adolph Peterson, and so on. So they went ahead with it. And oh, that's another thing. And actually, they needed a manager. Well, my dad had, well, it would be my cousin married this Mr. Ruben Sheets. He was from Pennsylvania. He was a Dutch, big, strong man, more of the farmer type. Well, let's point Mr. Sheets as a manager. I think my dad was probably the most interested and the most active in it. And he probably suggested, all right, we'll give Mr. Sheets a chance. Well, he went down there, I think, two or three years. But he was inexperienced, and the report was that he didn't get along with anyone or with the people down there. So then he was relieved of his job. I suppose I was kind of hard on my dad, but Mr. Sheets never got mad at my dad for it, I think it was understood. So then they appointed this Swenson. I just can't think of his name. It wasn't Carl Swenson. From Rockford? Well, no. He was really from Sweden. Hadn't been over too long, I guess. But where he was living at the time, they gave him the job. I'm not clear on that. Was he a young person? He was a young person, yeah. I would say when he was appointed to that manager job, I would guess that he would be between 25 and 30. And he'd come to Rockford frequently. We'd have him over for dinner. So you remember him personally. Oh, yeah. And he got acquainted with Pastor Seedorf's daughter, who was a very nice looking girl. And they hit it off. And so they were engaged and about to get married. They had probably set a certain date. And then my dad, he was at the Scandi at that time, but he was very active in everything. He had to go to New York, I think, on a sales matter to see one of the head salesmen out there. He got a telegram. Mr. Swenson found dead, shot himself in the company safe. I suppose one of those big safes. He opened the door and went into it and shot himself. So my dad immediately rushed down there. And naturally, he had to take care of everything, look after everything. And I remember my dad, he wrote the Swenson's parents and Sweden and arranged for everything and so on and so on. Was Seedorf actually in Rockford then or in Sweden, you think? He wasn't brought back to Rockford. I'm almost positive of that. So I got a hunch he went back to Sweden. I'm not clear on that, though. Well, anyway, let's see, what year would that have been? Well, I don't know. Anyway, then I suppose they had to have a manager down there. And I think they had, oh, there was a Mr. Payne. And I think there was a Mr. Landry. And they'd come up to Rockford and so on to see my dad and Mr. Lindell. Lindell and my dad were the main ones to kind of follow through. In the meantime, I think most of the other stock were just plain dropped out of it, because they probably thought it wasn't going to be successful. But my dad and Lindell just figured, well, we've got to stick it out. And oh, wait up now. Yeah, after he was shot, my dad didn't go down immediately. Probably he did within, I would say, within a month or two, maybe he got very straightened out here and went down there. And probably was there for a year and a half. Then either Landry or Payne was put in charge. So this would bring us up to the year, what would we say, 1925. And then, but the place, like my dad said, there was a mismanagement. I mean, my dad didn't know the business. Lindell was in the retail wholesale business, but I don't think he was a little bit too old, I think, to go down and manage himself. So the logs were stolen. They'd cut the logs and people would steal them. And then they had the cotton farm plantation. The White River would overflow and then cause damage. And but- So it was rented out then to local people, cotton farming business? Maybe a certain portion of it. But on the other hand, I think the, oh, by the way, I better explain this. Mr. Lindell, the main office was in Helena. But the plantation itself, 14,000 acres, was outside of Helena. And actually, they saw a town developed. And they called the town Lindell, after Mr. John P. Lindell, L-U-N-D-E-L-L. So he went on there personally then to- Mr. Lindell and my dad would go out occasionally. But my dad did most of the work. And Lindell, like my dad said, was a good partner, financially. But he was older. Well, he wasn't, maybe 10 or 15 years older than my dad. But they just, that was everything my dad went into. Other people, they'd all leave, and my dad do all the hard work, the responsibility. But Lindell was a good partner. But then the Depression come on. My dad couldn't feed it anymore. You see, Lindell and my dad, they kept feeding it with money during these bad years. I don't think the company ever did make any money, any profit. But somehow or other, and so then, I think my dad owed Lindell money. And they owed one another back and forth. So finally, my dad owed Lindell money. So they made a deal. My dad turned over all his Lindell and Lumber Company stock. I think there was two divisions, the Lindell and Lumber, and then the Archer Lumber. Anyway, it was sort of together. And so Lindell finally got, owned the whole thing. And somehow or other, I don't know how he did it. He managed to retain control. See, Mr. Lindell died in, I think, 1936. So the boys, the boys, there was, see, there was Paul Lindell, Ed Lindell, and Ray Lindell. And I think they were very, and probably rightfully, very concerned, well, we can't noise and feed them with more money. So I think they just retrenched and maybe rented out the property and so on. So they didn't, their expenses were way down. See, my dad and Lindell, I think they, well, we've got to make it better and bigger. And they put in money all the time. So the boys, I think, didn't do that. And I think they finally came out. And finally, they sold it. I don't know what year. And probably, I think, I think, see, Ed is the only one left. Well, there's one daughter, Mildred Lindell. She never got married. But Ed is very, very secretive. He's a good fella. By the way, I don't know if you want to, but I could give you his address. He could give you more dope than I can, really. Well, you talk with him, not discuss it so many years after. What does he say about it? Is he the same age as you are? He's a little older. So he remembers very vividly then what happened on there. Yeah, but, you know, just as a matter of interest, I'd meet Ed once in a while. And I'd ask, how's things down there? And he wouldn't open up. And the other fellows had told me the same that worked for him. See, Ed finally operated the Colonial Desk Company, a furniture company. But Ed wouldn't, he was very secretive. And one time, one time I asked him, he was swimming down at the pool. And I was, so I asked him about it. He got a little peeved at me. Oh, I don't want to talk about something like that. And so I would like to know, but although I don't see him very much, but. Was he actually down there working with you then? I don't think Ed or the boys, I don't think, ever went down there for any length of time. Maybe they had to go on a trip down there. But they never worked down there, no. They probably paid the taxes then and the time. Made the value bigger. That's right. Inflation got to their side. But I'll say this for Ed. Of course, Ed is very, well, quiet, reserved, nothing wrong with that. But he doesn't, a lot of people say that he's a millionaire now. But you would never know it. I mean, he's very, he's not socially minded or anything. And I think very conservative about making donations and so on. But if you feel like it, he only lives just east of here on James Avenue. That's about three or four blocks east. And he could tell you about how the outcome. Oh, then another thing. I remember someone said, well, there's oil down in there. And I remember my dad and they'd talk about it a little bit, should we check into it further. And one of my brothers, well, all of the boys, we went to Boyd College. And Cully, he was my brother, but he's passed away now. He was taking a course in geology. So my dad says, why don't you ask Professor Wing about that? He thought there'd be any oil down in there. So Cully did. And of course, I don't say it was a thorough checkup. Probably wasn't. But Professor Wing said, yeah, there's oil down there, but it's pretty deep. But anyway, I don't think they ever did go into trying to drill. But anyway, my dad and Lundell put in a lot of money. But Lundell's family come out all right, because somehow they retrenched. And then the value went up for the land. And who's got it now, I don't know. What kind of wood was growing there? Was it hardwood? Flat walnut? They had walnut. They had a lot of gumwood. And they had some oak. And then I guess they had softwood, too. But the Furniture Factory didn't use that. But I think it was mainly gum and oak and walnut. How did they assess the value of it? Now, 14,000 acres. They couldn't walk around and look what they bought? Or was it prime growing forest, all of it? I don't really know. I'm really not up on that. But they went down there to check it out, though, to see if there was some. Oh, yeah. Sure they did. Lots of interest, though. Oh, you were asking about other outside interests. My dad had never went in for stocks and bonds or anything like that. But another venture, the Rockford Swedes started. Someone told him about, what would it be, Olive and Lemon Ranch out in California. So sure enough, Mr. Wester, my dad, Mr. Lind was on it, Wendell, a few others, they got property out there. Where was the name of that town? I forget. But anyway, that didn't work out either. It didn't? No. No. Did they go out there to check it out? Yeah, they went out there. Yeah. Who gave them those wild ideas, I mean, to travel so far away and without having your— That I don't know. I really don't know. Oh, let's see now. You see, my rock—I can't think of the—there's a furniture fellow here in town. Well, I think he originally had the Rockford Furniture, which is that big furniture factory near Fairgrounds Park. And that went bad. And he's the one, I think, told my dad and others about his property out there. I think he was—that's probably where they got the idea. And my dad then took over the Rockford Furniture Company. I don't see how he did it, a big factory. He was still at Scandia. But I think you ask where that idea came from. I got an idea. It came from—what was his name? I can't think of it now. But he was originally a Rockford fellow, this fellow, but then he must have moved out to California, maybe after he lost control of the Rock—or after that went bad, and started this Oliven Lemon Ranch or whatever you call it. But it didn't work out anyway. It didn't work out? No, no. In pursuing all those different interests, your dad, now, did he talk to you and your brothers there? No, no. Never into how he was dealing? No. He never did that? No. Why? He would think he would give you some clues about getting into business yourself. Well— He wanted education for all of you. All of you went to college. But he didn't have any specifics telling you, for instance, what you should do when you— Well, I got an idea. Well, this is true. You see, I think I mentioned that Mr. Lind— Robert Lind—you see, Robert Lind and John Lindell, my dad, they were three of them. They'd worked back and forth, worked together. And both of them, I think, were good men, Lind and Lindell. Anyway, Mr. Lind started—he was in the furniture, but he had the Rockford Chair in Furniture, which was a big factory. He had to buy a lot of furniture hardware, you know, knobs and hinges and pulls and supports and stuff like that. So he started this little company called Ornamental Brass. But it was just a little one-horse outfit, you might say. So my dad—I remember I happened to read a letter. Lind wrote to me and said, Well, you mentioned one of these days I'm going to probably ask you if you put a couple thousand dollars into the brass shops. This is maybe in 1926 or something like that. Then after my dad left Scandia, of course he was down there in Elna, but he wasn't feeling good unless he was working. So I think one reason he went into Ornamental Brass—that's the name they gave it—was to help Mr. Lind and then also maybe find a place for me or one of my brothers to work at, see? I think that was his prime reason. Atencio But you never said anything. Atencio No, no. Atencio You started out from the floor level, so to speak. Atencio Just, yeah, for a month or two or three. And I liked the business. It was interesting. I liked it. And, yeah, well, that's a long story, too. My dad, as I mentioned, he put in $254,000 in a period of two or three years to get new machinery. He had a wonderful plant there, a nice poundy, one of the best in Rockford, good plating department, and so on. And— Atencio It seems to me that he was willing to plow in any kind of excess of money he got. Atencio Oh, yeah. Yeah. Atencio The rest of the factories, like Landstrom's and Republic and whatever, they were more or less dilapidated in the early 30s. Atencio Yeah. That's right. Atencio Because they didn't renew themselves. Atencio That's right. Atencio But your dad, he was not afraid to plow in six or seven. Atencio No. No. That's right. That's right. Atencio New machinery. Atencio And when the pressure would come on there, all the factories started cutting wages. Oh, my dad, we won't cut because this will last six months. And finally we did cut, though. But there was mistakes made because it was a new business to my dad. Oh, he's the type that caught on quickly, especially the sales end of it and so on. But I noticed right away when I got over it, I hadn't too much experience in manufacturing, but I noticed that the workers were a little slipshod. They didn't hit the ball and so on and so on. And oh, another thing, someone would say, say, we ought to have a better way of doing this. Well, got to get a machine. Well, that's, well, tell Mr. Brolin, he'll buy it. He'll pay for it. So we got a lot of new machinery in there. It was a pretty well-equipped shop, I would say. But then during this, maybe you say my dad went in, when did he go into that? Twenty-seven, now went into it twenty-nine. And there was a, we were improving all the time, then the depression come on and the furniture factories didn't need much, you know. So the volume was down so little. And that's another thing, my dad was very, very liberal on salary. Now, we had to got a, we got a furniture hardware designer by the name of Mr. Gerber. He was originally from Grand Rapids and he worked at National Lock for a while. And he was good. He was an older fellow, too. And so my dad paid him, who was it? He paid him, I think it was six hundred a month, which at that time would be equal to, six hundred a month, which today would be equal to maybe two thousand a month. This is tremendous. It was either five or six hundred. And what was his? He was a designer. All he had to do is, you know, in a furniture business you got to have new designs all in, same with the hardware, the trim, like this. He'd make a new design, something like that. And then he paid his foreman good. And so on and so on. So the overhead was too high for the volume of business. Atencio They were making it work, you know. How much did he receive there in the ROH? I remember we had a, let's see, what would a, oh, then we had what you call a chaser. You make a pattern out of metal, and a chaser, he takes his fine knife to make the lines real clear so that when they make the embossing tool it shows up. They had one Japanese fellow doing it and the other a big Swede fellow by the name of Gilly, Gilly Helene. They sat across from each other. And they were good workers, but they took their time. In other words, the overhead was high. But I think my dad figured, well, we're building up now, we don't care if we have to spend money and we lose money. Soon, maybe two years from now we'll be making good. But then the Depression come on. So the overhead was too high. So the other workers, they were satisfied too then with what they did there. There was no after-hour talk about union organizing or anything at that time, was there? A No, no. No. No. I think, as I recall, as a whole we had a good bunch of workers. I got acquainted with them and knew them. And they were a good bunch of workers, although I remember the plating room foreman, what was his name, Buck Holmes, H-O-L-M, I think it was. No, H-O-L-M-E-S, Holmes. And he knew the plating business, but he just stood around. And then on Saturday afternoon he'd have his assistant. I think we worked Saturday morning up till noon. Then he'd have Carl Nagel, the assistant, stay all afternoon. Carl, all he would do was regenerate the solutions or something like that. And Mr. Carlson, the new superintendent, and myself, we wondered about that. And we found out that it was absolutely unnecessary. In other words, Buck just wanted to give this fellow added time. And another thing that Buck Holmes did, he was in charge of the polishing room. We had piecework. And, you know, in any line you have some workers are A-1, some are B-1, and so on. And I noticed every day I'd pick up the – we had piecework. They had to make out time slips. And I'd check those tickets. I know it well. Certain item that had to be polished, one fellow would have the price, we'll say, $20 a thousand, another one would have it $10 a thousand. In other words, each one would be making the same amount of money. The expert was having $10, and he'd still make out good, but the slow one would be getting $20. So I told Buck that's not right. And he, of course, he didn't realize that anyone would find out about it. And, of course, I told him right out, so I think he knew he was on the spot. So then he quit. And then Carl Nagle took over. Carl was good. He was the assistant. But he had – now, but you know how workers are. Carl, he probably knew that he shouldn't have been there Saturday afternoon, but, oh, the old man will pay for it or something like that. So there was a lot of things like that. And, of course, my dad –