 And Svenskarnas Dagna, they are all groups together then, like the central committee of the whole area. Oh, that represents all the Swedish organizations. Any income then, is that divided among the groups? No, they keep it for some... I don't know, they have their own treasure. They are rolling over to next year. I think they have sent people over, some queen or somebody to Sweden a couple of times, and that must cost them something unless they get the trip. You never know how that works. Is that Einer Jansson? That's right. He has been for 25 years. Well, he isn't the president now. He is emeritus now, but he still takes care of the Swedish day as the master ceremony, as he always has for 25 years. He did last summer too. But there are other people that are actually president and vice chairman. I've never been on that committee. No? No, I've been a member of the Minnesota American Swedish Council, MASK. I was treasurer of that for several years. I'm still a member of it, but that's... Oh, that's a separate group from the Swedish Council. Right. But Einer, he's chairman of that now. They have something to do with this Camel Garden up in Lindström, in Scandia. Oh, yes, Scandia. Yes. In other words, we've supported that place up there quite a bit. They had some funds left over when the king was here last and had something where they raised some $40,000, $50,000. We've spent it down so now it's much less and given it to the Camel Garden. Otherwise... Are there members then from different lodges too in this? Well, that's right. There are members representing from different lodges that are different groups. See, Einer belongs to Vasa, but very seldom comes. He belongs to Runeberg Lodge. And we don't see him come to a... Probably a Christmas party or something like that he'll show up. And there's... Well, let's see. There are different... Yeah, that's right. Different groups in Mast just the same as it is in Swedish Day. But Mast is not represented in Swedish Day, I don't think, at all. It's a group that's really supporting that place up in Scandia. Anna Enquist, what's her name? Anna Enquist. Enquist. She's the head of the... I saw her for many years. Yeah. Well, she's up in... She's up... She's the head of the historical part of it up there. Of the Camel Garden. Yeah. I've taken... No, they send a Lucia here from Sweden usually at Christmas time and I've taken... A couple of times I've taken her up to the Christmas party up at Scandia and they have their Lucia and this Swedish Lucia from Sweden and things like that. But I'm too old to do that now so I haven't done that in the last couple of years. But that's been going on for many years though. Oh, yeah. That's been going on for the last, say, ten years. The first one that came was Alina Sten... Sten... Anyway, she's married now in Sweden. We were here having her as a visitor and she asked me how old I was and I told her, she said, my goodness, you could be my grandpa. So I was happy to call me... I was her United States grandfather. Oh, wow. So I had a granddaughter in Sweden. That's how we... That's the first one that came here. So they have been working out pretty good then with this... Well, yes. It's a good change. The idea of the whole thing was that we were supposed to send one over there from here, two from Sweden, you know, one from 19 and one from 20 and then one from here over there. Well, we never did that. And so it's been some... The people here lose interest because of the fact that we don't get one to send from here. This is the Swedish day or... No, it's not that. It's the Scandinavian American Foundation or something that Einar's got something to do with too. Why hasn't anybody been sent from here? I don't know. Well, it should have been. That was the agreement that we would take over and entertain the girl when she came here and then we would send one of our young people over there for one year. That never happened. We just keep on taking them in and they're all good girls. You can't take it apart just because someone comes over. You can't change the situation. You got to keep on doing what you're doing. We don't have much to say about that. Einar was the one that... Oh, he isn't short of that. It's... It really isn't Vasa here. It's Vasa over there that takes care of picking out who they send. But here it isn't exactly that. We take them to a couple of doings that we have here and then she also goes up to a lot of the stuff that the Svenskandals choir has so that she gets to a lot of places. It's, I'm sure, very interesting for the girl from Sweden to come over and visit. And Svenskandalsdalen over the years has been one of the most... Well I think it's a pretty strong......placed in the United States. Yeah. Up to 25,000 sometimes. Oh yes, they've had the place built. I think they must have had 8,000, 10,000 even this summer. Yeah, I think so. And that's in Minnehaha Park. Minnehaha Park. And they have people come over with groups from Sweden and put on part of the show and we have dancers here. In other words, our junior department of Vasa and the senior dancers, they put on. And then they have a contest for a Swedish Day Queen who enters the Aquitaine program and gets on the parade and could actually be the Miss Minnesota or whatever you call her. So it's all interesting stuff for people to go into. But that represents all the churches and all the clubs and IOGT and what have you. And the... The problem there is they're getting older there too. Oh yeah. The old people are not enough, the young ones are. Well yeah, we're getting some younger ones now though. We've got the vice chairman now is a member of our lodge, and he's got what, five kids? So it's time, of course, you've been having Einer there. Now he's well along in age too now. He must be up in 65. Oh, I think so. He's well over retirement, that's for sure. I think about 70, pretty close. Yep. But he's been a spark plug to them. Yeah, he's been a real good spark plug for Swedish Day. I know we've been to it when we've had... Oh, I think the last president that was here was Lyndon Johnson. That's one time that he was here. And those times when you get something like that, come you get the crowd. So he invites politicians? He invites politicians, and as a group they invite them, and sometimes they get them, and sometimes they don't... I can't work it, you know. I had, of course, Hubert Humphrey, he lived here, he was a local man. So he came every... Well, just quite a few times he's been there, right. Yeah. It was Hubert Yelmer Humphrey, you see. He was a Norwegian back home, wasn't he? I don't know, he came out of South Dakota somewhere. Yes. Yeah. He was always... He was a good politician. Yes, he... he knew how to talk. Yeah, he knew how to tell it. We were on a trip to Hawaii one time, and I was up in the... He was running for vice president or something, and I was talking to the fellow in the... He was the maitre d' of the rest of the hotel, and when he heard I was from Minnesota, he had to find out all about Humphrey, and I didn't know a heck of a lot about him. I said, he's a good talker, and he may be a real good man. Well, we got to vote for him. He was a good Democrat out in Hawaii. I don't get into politics very much. You don't have time to vote. No. We had a competition of local drill teams. That's about 1939. We had it in Hibbing in 1940, and we had it in Two Harbors, and in 1941, we had it in St. Paul. And we had a parade in Hibbing, and Vasa had a parade on Saturday, and we also had it in Two Harbors, and then we had a competition in the schoolhouse between, oh, five lodges, I think it was, in Minnesota. And Two Harbors, no, Superior won the first year, and we got second place. And we went to Two Harbors, and we won then, and we won in St. Paul, but then the next one we didn't go to because, I don't know, because our boys were in the Army. That's right. The War Stands. The Hibbing one, they were a girls team. And then that quit out, but we did it for about four or five years, having competition. It must have been a good thing, though, to bring young boys together. Oh, it was. It brought young people together. They were waiting for the next visit. Oh, I got a 16-millimeter movie that I'm going to bring down to the archives and leave it there, but it's pretty hard for people to know what it is unless, but you haven't, it isn't so talky. It's a quiet one. I mean, it's a silent 16-millimeter that they took of the parade up there. And I think we've seen it enough here, so I'm going to bring it down and leave it at the archives, and they can do what they want with it. But we should be able to put a tape recorder with it some way. That might be all right. Yes, to get the song. To explain who it is. They could show it so you could say who this is and who that is, so people could see it in a few years. It's a colored picture. It's a good film. So I'm going to bring that down and see what happens. We have to get his machinery over there, then we do, and we'll have to show it and tell them what it is. That's right. So you had a big district to visit all over? Oh, yeah, it's a long ways between. Of course, it isn't as big as Illinois. They got long, long ways there. But then you go into Massachusetts, and they haven't got very far with all their lodges. They're right together. But California's got long ways, too. Yes. But they are two districts, though. Yeah, they're two districts north and south. Yeah, they divided that. At least wintertime visits are hard. Oh, yeah. You don't... You go up north and... Brainerd, how long did they lodge? No, there was never a store in Brainerd. No. I know it is. There was one in Fergus Falls years ago. There was one in Moorhead years ago. But that was just a few Swedes, and they didn't... The young ones never did get in. They finally passed away because the old ones go out, and they're gone, and there's nobody there to replace them. So they take some spark plugs. You got to have... They're there. Yeah, and then you got to have someone... And then two knobs. And then you got to get the old one, like us, out of there and let someone else take a hold before... And don't you think that all the timers are needed for support and... Well, you got to be there to... Stability. Yeah, I think you have to have... And wait to move back. Because if you let the two young ones right away, they'd probably... Well, they'd probably ruin it. Stray away from the Constitution. Right. Well, you weren't at the convention to see the end of it, but all these new ideas they had, you probably saw the book. I don't know. They had many ideas that... Oh, they had a new ritual entirely? That didn't go. Didn't even go through it? No, no. They did away with... They did away with two things. You don't have to salute now. And as soon as they get a card, a membership card, then you're going to get away with a password. You don't need that. Well, no password either. There will be after a couple of years. Not yet. Until they get a card. Everybody has a card. So then you know who's in your lodge. You don't need to take their name. I mean, you don't need to ask them if he's got your password. But if you came to my lodge and come up there and said, well, could I see your card? If I didn't know you, then I'd ask you to show me your card. Then, okay, you're in. That's all right. But this was the Arizona district that had all these ideas. Which was a young lot. And some of them were good. You're darn right. They got some darn good ideas, but it didn't go over with the old sweet. It didn't go over the first time with us. You'll see. It's going to work into it, though. In another term or so you'll find that they'll be taking that over. Because they got it so you could have a meeting in a room. You didn't have to sit around like we do. You could sit like in a theater, you know, just the chairs facing the altar, facing the head guy. It was a lot of good ideas. Because some of these people can't afford to rent halls anymore. Or you could have it in someone's amusement room, for instance, where you could have 20, 25 people and you've got a good little lodge. It's something to think about. So they have to. But that's beyond our... That's just ideas. Well, nothing ever gets presented at the one convention you take. No. And they have to present it several times before it sinks in, you know. Right. And it better sink in. That's the right word. Right. And it took, for instance, our Ross the Star, which I wonder if everybody reads. You know, it may be just a paper that comes to your house and you look in it to see if there's anything about Moline, Illinois, and if there isn't anything there, then we don't read the rest of it, you know. But it took about 12 years before they finally got that to go. As a matter of fact, from 1950 to 1957, whatever, 50, 60, 62, I think it was, at Jane, where they had it, everybody got it. And your dues were paid. Well, that was a big discussion. Everybody... Before that, you had to subscribe to it, but they didn't have more than probably 5,000 people out of the 30,000 they had. Now they've sent it to 20,000 places. It's a good idea. Yes. But does everybody read it is the question. Well, that's what... You never know, but... Well, I read it, but then I'm interested. And I know people that are in these different areas, and you'll get something about them, and it's nice to read about it. But if I was Johnny Johnson in my lines and never saw this guy, I probably wouldn't know what he's writing me about, see? So it's hard to say whether it's good or bad. But there's probably a necessity to have a house organ. Oh, you've got to have a house organ, that's for sure. Yeah. So they know what's going on. We publish a little newsletter from Minnesota here. Of course, that's just local information. It goes to all our members. She types it up, and I mail it. Once every month? No, no. Three times a year. Only three times a year. Every four months. May, April... Or is it April 15th? No, May 15th. January 15th, May 15th, and September 15th. I have all those copies here. I should send them there. But I'm sure it's appreciated by members. They are old and all, they can't get out and so on, so they know what's going on. Oh, yeah. Yeah. They all like it. Because if they only want to send in the news, they don't know what's going to happen for the news. That's right. At least they hear something about it. Now they aren't able to go to meet them, but at least they get some news about what's going on. So that helps, I'm sure. We do more like a calendar deal where we tell what's going on, where each lot can put in what they want to. You tell them what they're going to have coming up in the next four months. It's just a little advertising for them. And the district master has a corner and so on. Probably could send you a copy sometime, you know what's going on. I've seen them in the archives. Yeah, that's right. You've seen them there. That's right. We send one to the archives or to Bertle, and he gets it down to the archives. That's a lot of work to put that on. We have Joanne Thoreen as the editor. She's the one that gets the stuff together. And then Helen types it, and then we mail it on a non-profit deal. That's a lot of work that some people have to do. Oh, yeah. They never realize that. No, that's true. And if they don't get it, then they kick about it. They wonder why you can't do it. At least you know you read it. They read it, they kick. That's how you go. You never hear them say anything good about it. Well, we find when you have put something in a little bit wrong, then they'll tell me, well, that isn't exactly the way it's supposed to be. I know, but I'm glad to hear you're reading the paper anyway, I said. We found that that was an error, but that's all right. We'll fix it next time.