 We have the 10th of August 1987 and I'm sitting together with Mrs. Van Ward. Okay. Is it Grosse Point? No, I live in East Detroit. East Detroit, Michigan. She was born 1921, 26th of January in Stockholm, Sweden and came in 1922 to the United States. Okay. Now you want to know about my parents? Yeah, what about your parents now? Okay, my father's mother and father died when he was young. So it was just him and his brother. So they decided to leave Sweden and they both left. My father became a seaman, you know, on the boats and he traveled all over. When he hit the United States, he left the ship. He entered the country illegally. And he eventually came, I don't know where the boat was, but he eventually came to Detroit. So he worked here and my mother came to, when she was 17, she came by herself. She didn't know any English. My mother came here all by herself to this country when she was 17. Didn't know a word of English, but she had two girlfriends who had come over earlier and they lived in Canada and they told her, come on, you know, come on. So she came by herself and she came to Canada. And then from Canada, of course, she came to the United States, to Detroit. But she had no trouble then to walk across the border? No, she came, she entered, you know, legally. I mean, it was all. And she met my father at a dance in Detroit and they were married in 1917. And then I think things were a little hard, you know, times were hard. And she wanted to go back for a visit. So finally when he had the money, she went. But at the moment she was pregnant. So that's why I was born in Sweden. So she went over there to visit her parents and the rest of her sisters, because she came from a big family. Nobody else came to this country except one other sister. So she stayed there then until my, I suppose my father had enough money to bring her back, which was a year and a half later. So then they. Your father came to Booth then? Yes. So there was probably what was on the field or a savings? Yeah, well, there was nothing there for him to do. I guess times were hard in those years. But your mother, she came from Dahlmann? Yeah, came from a poor family. Yeah, they were poor too. And when she went back in 1917, did she go after Dahlmann and then to stay with her parents or? Wherever they lived at that moment, I don't know exactly where they lived. But you were born in Stockholm? Yeah, yeah. For some reason I was. Maybe she stayed with one. She might have stayed with one of her sisters that was closer in Stockholm. So she stayed home a whole year then? She was there, I figure, yeah. She was there more than that. I don't know how long they were allowed in those days to stay out of the country. I don't know what the rules were. But, yeah, she must have arrived in 1920 and then I was born in 21, you know, or in January. And then she didn't come back to this country until the middle of 22. So she probably... So it was in 1920 she went there? Yeah, it must have been at the end of 1920. What kind of work was your father doing? Well, my father eventually became a toolmaker. So then he did get a good job. He always worked after that. There was no problem anymore, yes. But your mother, she was able to survive in Stockholm? She must have lived with her family. She had about eight sisters. So there was no problem. No problem. And her parents were both living. So there was no problem. I don't think... And then you came back with her in 1920? Yeah. So you went to school there then? Oh yes. Did they settle down in the Swedish neighborhood in Detroit? No. They just moved all around wherever they felt like. And I don't know why they... First they lived in Highland Park. And then from Highland Park we moved to someplace in Detroit. And then I know we moved out to Roseville when I started school. Renting an apartment? Always renting. Always renting, yes. And in those periods of time... When I was six, I went to first grade. And of course, in those years, you didn't want to be an alien or an immigrant. My parents always spoke Swedish at home. We understood perfectly, my brother and I. But I never, never spoke a word of Swedish. You never answered back? No. I didn't want to be Swedish. And I didn't want to be Swedish in school either. Did you get harassed outside of your home? Well, I mean, in those years, people looked at us kind of funny if you were an alien. You were able to know them. An immigrant, yes, sure. I knew that. Your playmates, for instance? They were all English. All American. All Americans. You had no Swedish playmates? No. Not when we were living out there, no. Never did. No. Except there were friends of my parents who they knew who were Swedish, and they had children. Those were the only children we played with that were Swedish. And, of course, my cousin. But your parents, they continued to talk Swedish at home? Oh, yeah, they did, and they talked perfect English, too. They learned English right away. I mean, there was no problem with them. But they felt more comfortable with the Swedish? For a while. It got, eventually, as they got older and we, you know, it... You know, how it finally just became English. Did they join the church, then? They always said they belonged to the Swedish church. They finally joined this church when we moved into this neighborhood. You lived in Highland Park? It was too far from this church. Oh, yeah. We didn't go to any church, no. There was no Swedish church close by in Bethlehem, for instance? I don't think so. I never knew of any. No. Uh-uh. So you didn't go to Sunday school, then, when you were growing up? No. When I lived out in Roseville, I went to Sunday school, but there was a church on the corner. I don't know what it was, but I went there. Yeah. And you were confirmed? I was confirmed at the Episcopal Church right down the street here on Frankfurt. Episcopal Church? Yes. My girlfriend, a neighbor of mine who was my girlfriend, she went there, so I went with her. But your parents didn't attend that church? No. Uh-uh. No. They said they belonged to the Swedish church. Oh, they never went. And this church was located down in the... Down on Veneto. Veneto and Mack. Yeah. And then when it was built, and then we moved into this area and... How far away was it from the old place, this church, I mean, this church, but I mean the organization itself? It was quite a ways, I think. Quite a ways? I think it is. I don't know. So why did they move out here? Was it because of all the Swedish who were living around? I guess so. Maybe Carl Anderson is in the next office. Maybe he can tell you that. Because he belonged to the Veneto church. Yeah. Carl? I can't talk to him. Yeah. So, but then when we moved out here, when we lived over here on Marlborough, then they did join. They finally did join this church. Their name is on this... Yeah. Uh-huh. Yeah. So when did you join the church? When we moved over here to Marlborough, I became part of it. Yeah. I was married here. Yeah. My girls were all baptized here at Emmanuel. Yeah. And one of them was married here. Yeah. So. Here's another Swede. So you didn't come together with too many Swedes down here when you grew up? No. When I was little, we used to go to Swedish parties or dances. I can remember going to... Danish Hall? Yeah. Danish Hall. Yes. We went to the Danish Hall. There were dances there. And what was it? Vasa Lodge? I think they had dances there. Yeah. We used to go to that up to a certain point and then they quit. I did not go anymore. Did they meet at the Danish Hall too? I think they did. It seems to me I remember Danish Hall. Yeah. They had their own hall on the grass. Yeah. Did they belong to the Vasa, your parents? No. No. My father was not a joiner. My mother would have liked to join. Because she was... She loved to dance, but my father did not. I don't know how they ever met. They were two different personalities. Absolutely. And you were two in the family and one... I have a brother. Yes. He was born here. One brother and... Yeah. He was born in here. He was born in Detroit. So they went to school. Yep. They were all English, of course. And you had no trouble because you were... No. I grew... Yes. I had no accent. No nothing. Yeah. The only trouble I had with the teachers was trying to get them to understand my father's name. You know, that Arvid... They never could get that in their head. They always said, well, isn't it Harvey? I said, no. It's Arvid. Well, they could never spell the right. They didn't. I spelled it. You know, I had... You know, they couldn't pronounce it right. Yeah. That's what I thought. Jeez, I don't want to be Swedish. These odd names. Even my own name. I don't know where my mother ever got Edna. She never explained it. I don't know. Edna is easy to pronounce. It is easy. Yes. Yes, it is. I don't know whether it's a Swedish name or not. I don't know. I don't know. It is easy. Yeah. But Arvid is different. It is different. Right. So from that point on, the Swedes were not too... No. I wasn't too happy with them. The Swedish was not too good, too. No. I became more Swedish the moment that I came back here to work. I came to work when my husband died. And that's... He died about 20 years ago. 21. But then I came here in 71 to work. And a lot of the people I knew, I had known as a kid, you know, as a child, met them, you know, somewhere or other. They knew me or knew my father. And of course I was married here, you know. So it seems that when I came back here, I became Swedish. And the neighborhood then changed parts to drive. Oh, it was all different. So it was all Swedish then. No, not when I came back here to work. It was changing. 20 years ago. No, 1971. That's 16 years ago. Oh, it's already changed then. It was already changing. Yeah. Yes. But there were still enough Swedes left here, so I became Swedish. Uh-huh. Yeah, really Swedish. I even took a course in trying to learn how to speak Swedish. I thought, oh, it'll be easy because I could remember. You know, for many years I could still understand Swedish. I thought, well, I have that in my ear. I can... No. It didn't work. No, it didn't work. Hardest thing in the world. Just didn't work. So you had to start all over again. Yeah, but I never did get anywhere, so I gave up. That was hard. And that's the one thing I regret. I wish now that I had learned when I was a child. It would have stuck with me because my cousin did, and it stuck with him. Because my mother's one sister finally came to America. It was the only relative I had here, and she married, and she had one boy. So there were nine sisters, you said. Nine sisters. Nine sisters and one boy. And one came over. Only one came. Nobody has ever come to visit us. No. Jo, but you must have a bundle of cousins over there. I do. I have a bundle of cousins all over. My cousin keeps writing to one, one of the older cousins. He has connection with her, and he finally made a visit back to Sweden. So then he met a lot of the relatives. They were glad to see him, and he was welcome. Uh-huh. Yeah. So he went back. So they know what happened with Karin and her baby. Oh, yeah. Uh-huh. Yeah. As I say, at that time, my mother did tell me my grandparents wanted her to leave me there. They figured I should grow up there. It would be easier for her to go. Yeah, but no. She didn't want to go there. No. And another thing, my father, it was hard for me to get used to my father because I had never seen him until I was a year and a half. So that was a little difficult. Your father, he was born on the— He was born three years later here. Uh-huh. Yep. So after finishing the school, then did you—you went through high school? Yep. Uh-huh. That's it. And— Uh-huh. I went to work. What was in the depression then, 34, 35? I graduated in 39 from high school. 39? 39 from high school, yeah. Oh, the depression was over. It was over, yeah. Did you notice anything about the depression when you were growing up or— Except just what it—how it affected us. My father worked for Colonial Broach, you know. Lundell's. Yes, Lundell's. Okay, he was never really laid off. He was laid off as the—maybe days or—but he had some work. He always had some work. So he was never really totally out of work. He always did. So that seems to have been a good company because they kept— For him, it was at that time, yes. Of course, we did lose—he bought one house that we lost. During the depression? Yes. That was earlier in Roseville. We lost a house. So then we moved back to Detroit. But it seemed then after that, then times got better, and he worked, yes. Sometimes he worked half days, and sometimes he worked only two or three days. But he was never completely out of work that I remember, never. Your parents didn't lose any money in their bank that's closed off? No, I don't think so, no. The house they— They lost—he lost— Do you remember that you were older than us? Oh, yes, because we lived in Roseville from when I was 6 to 12. When I was 12 years old, we moved back to Detroit. Mm-hmm, yeah. So that was like on the suburbs of Roseville. Yeah, it is. Out in the country. Yeah, kind of out in the country. Why did he move out there and buy a house out there? I have no idea. I really don't know. Because there was quite a photo in there. It was, because my father had a car. And there were a couple of other Swedish families out there, and we knew them. I don't know if they told him. And a lot of the Swedes worked for a colonial brooch, so they might have, yes. Yeah, I remember they came—they visited often, yeah. So they moved in and rented an apartment in Detroit? Yeah, a flat, upper flat, yeah. So you had to take the bikes from home? Yeah, my father always had a car. I remember him always having a car. So he never had it. I can't say we ever really had it that tough, no. So you started working there? After I graduated from high school, I went to work, yep. As a secretary? Well, I was a typist first. Then I worked for the school board, and then I got married, and then I got back to work. So how did you meet your husband? He wasn't a Swede? No, he happened to be the uncle of a couple of girls that lived next door to me in Roseville. So I knew him. I knew of him when I was little. I see. Yeah, I finally met him, yeah. Uh-huh, yeah. One is married to a Greek. So you have two children with Chester Ward, and he was a French, Belgian, Dutch background, and born in Detroit. Yeah. And how did he come into the Swedish life now with your parents? Oh, okay. There was never any, yeah. Because we always had Christmas Eve. My parents always celebrated the regular Christmas Eve, and we had lutefisk, which, you know, of course, you didn't eat if you didn't like, which I didn't like, but we had everything else. Yeah, we always had that every year. Yep, uh-huh. The Santa Claus comes to an end, or? Yeah, uh-huh, yeah. We celebrated Christmas and Christmas Eve just like the Swedes. Yep, we always did that. Yep. And how did you get along with Hessen in North North? About who? Your husband's parents. No, they were deceased. Oh, I see. Yeah, there was nothing, no. No. And you had two girls. Yeah, my husband had one girl when he married me, so I raised three girls, really. He died young, then, or? Fifty-three. Fifty-three. Yeah, uh-huh, yep. So you had to raise them while he was off, then? Well, yes, of course, his girl was already married at that time, and my oldest girl was married. I just had one left at home, yeah. So then you took a secretariat job? Yeah, yes. And you started at the men's dorm? I started at a church in my neighborhood, a Presbyterian church, and then some of my neighbors had gone here, and they told me that they needed somebody, so. And, of course, over the years I had met Pastor Truitt, you know, at different things, different church meetings I'd seen him, so I just fitted right in. He stayed there for many years, Pastor Truitt? Yeah, he was here for 25 or more, yeah. 25 years. Yep. So then after you married, you were not with the Swedes in any organization? No, except, no, just among our family, that's all. So did you notice any Swedish in Detroit at that time, that they had the memes and the memes and? No, I, oh, I used to see that, I would read about that, but I didn't have anything. They had these summer festivals? I think the Swedish organizations have, yeah. And then after my husband died, I did go with my cousin. He was, my cousin was involved with the Swedish engineers, so. Oh, he belonged to that? Oh, yeah, at one point in time, I think he was even president. Yes, so I used to, I went with them a couple times to Swedish doings, they took me. And your cousin's name was? Is Lars, that's another name that I never wanted to tell anybody. You know, all those years I was growing up, and you know what I called my cousin? Lawrence. Lawrence. Lawrence, because I read somewhere that Lawrence was English, I mean, Swedish for Lars, Lars, I mean, Lars in English was Lawrence. So I called him Lawrence. You still do that? No, uh-uh, no, no, no. He's Lars. He's Lars, Lars. He was the president for the Swedish engineers? I think he was at one point in his life, yeah. Was he an engineer then? Well, I don't know if you have to be an engineer, I don't know what that organization is, but my cousin belongs to it. What kind of work was he doing? He works for Ford Motor, he's in quality control. I don't know what he is now, but he was, and he is six years younger than I am. Today, in fact, today is his birthday, he turned 60 today. So he is pretty soon retired, I assume. He hopes to work another couple years, yes. And your brother, what kind of work was he doing? My brother was a pattern maker. He is already retired. He's three years younger than I am, but he feels he couldn't work anymore, so he retired. He is not really Swedish at all. He is more American than either one of us. Now, my cousin was born here, but he is Swedish. His mother, he learned how to speak Swedish from his mother. Does he still speak Swedish? Oh, yeah, sure he does. He can speak Swedish, yes. As I say, he went to Sweden, and he's the one who keeps track of people over there. Did he grow up with other sisters and brothers? No, he was the only one. The only one? Yeah. Maybe he was very close to his mother. He was close to his mother and his father, although his father died when he was about 13. His father was Swedish also, but yeah, so he kept it up, yeah. Those were your aunts, some of them. Yeah. Did you hear anything about the Vasa Country Club up in Lapeer? Oh, yeah, we were there. We used to go there. For doings? Yeah, we went there a couple times. One time, the only time that I remember going there, it was so miserable. The mosquitoes, I sat in the car. I was an odd kid. I sat in the car. Never wanted to go to Lapeer Country Club again. So Lapeer was nothing to you? No, not at that point. I mean, I think they were just building it up. I have not gone back since. It must have been in the early 30s then. Yeah, it must have been, yes. So you remember there were the mosquitoes. I remember the mosquitoes. Bad thing to remember, but I remember the mosquitoes. So your parents didn't buy a plot up there? No, no. My father was not that kind of a man, no. We went up north every year on vacation, but... For fishing? Yeah, and by the lake, but he never even thought of buying a piece of land up there either. I mean, you know, he could have, but he didn't. Did they go back this week, your parents? No, only my mother. My mother went back in 1947 for a visit. My father felt that there was nothing. When he left that country, that was it. There was nothing there for him ever again. He had no sisters left or family? He had nothing for him, no. And his brother landed in Australia. Never heard from him again either. I have no idea whatever happened to him. Completely disappeared? I think he wrote to him a couple times and then that was the end. Never heard anymore. So I don't know. And in those times, I think, they took different names. They were not both Peterson. I don't know if you took the name of a priest or somebody in the... So he changed his name? So his brother and he did not wind up with the same last name for some reason. So he was Petterson, you know, Peterson, yeah, and what his brother became. So he had no connection with his parents back in the wars down there? They died, so he was, I mean, there was nothing there. He had a hard life there and he did not want to go back. He said there was nothing in Sweden for him. Your mother went back in 1946? Oh, yeah, and for her, you understand, all you had to say was, they do this better in the United States. No, they don't. Everything is better in Sweden. So that was your mother's thought? That was my mother's opinion all her lifetime, that everything was done better in Sweden. Everything, people, everything was better in Sweden. So she was really... She was really. Was she homesick then? I don't know if she was or not. No, I don't know. It was just her idea, yeah, and you could really get her mad. What did your father say then in an argument with her? He never stuck up for Sweden. I mean, America was his country. He finally, and he was afraid of being deported at one time, you know, because he had entered illegally, but he went to the authorities, I think when we lived in Roseville, during the early 30s, and told them what, you know, gave them all the information, and it was all cleared up. He became a citizen. In the 1930s? In the 30s, early, yes, and that's how I became a citizen. I became a citizen through him. In the 40s, when the war started, I thought, oh, I better have some kind of papers, because, you know, after all, I was not an American, you know, I'm not an American, I wasn't an American citizen. No, you were a Swedish citizen. Yes, so then I too went, I went downtown, and I got my citizenship, what they called derivative, through my father. I was able to become a citizen. How about your mother? My mother didn't become a citizen until, I don't know, was it, I think the late 50s. She didn't really want to, but they were persuaded it was better all around, or she was. So what did she say to them in the tournament in Sweden in 1946? Well, I think she found things different, you know, she didn't talk too much. Of course, when she went back in 47, by that time, both her parents had died. When was 47? 47, she went back. Both her parents had died. They were dead by then, they died in the 30s. So it was different, it was just her sisters that were left. Her brother had died a lot earlier too, so I guess she found things different. But she still, you know, thought Sweden, Anything Swedish was on top, right. She always felt that way. You couldn't tell her that things were changing over there, and I find a lot of people here who have never been back, don't read the paper, you know, they figure it's ideal over there, you know, yeah, but it isn't. It would be like a dream. It's like a dream, yeah. It's not real until they see it themselves. Yeah, and I know when my cousin went over there, and they told me of the things that they found, and he had never been there before, you know, it has changed. People are changing, the complexion of the people are changing. What did your cousin say after you returned the first time? He had never been there before. He only went there once. Oh, I see. Just a few years ago, and he found a lot of Indian people were there, you know, from Asia, Asian, yes, which he never knew before, you know. He didn't expect to see that. Didn't expect to see that, but there were a lot of them, yes. So it's not all totally Swedes. So there was not in the 70s or 80s he went back then? 80s he went back. Let's see how long ago I've been back. It's been about four years maybe he went back. There was kind of a setback then, he saw all those orientals. Oh, well, yeah, of course, they didn't expect it. Of course, he writes to our cousin, and of course, I don't think she says anything like that, but from what his mother had told him, I suppose he had a different idea. And they were surprised to see that. Your mother, did she make another visit later on? No, she just went once, and my aunt, too, only went back once. That's the only visits they made. And they didn't go together, they each went separately. So here in Detroit, your aunt and your mother, did they keep close together? Oh, yeah, oh, yes, always. Did they help each other when they needed them? Oh, yes, we helped my aunt and uncle always, because my uncle at that time was about 20 years older than my aunt. And he was a fellow who had hay fever, and he had a good job. He was at that time what they called a dye maker. They had pretty good jobs. But at this time of the year, his hay fever got so bad that whatever job he had, he quit. In those days, you couldn't take a leave or vacations. You left, that's it. You left, that was it. And he went up north because it was better, the air was better up in Grayling. So when he came back, he never had a job. So my father really helped support them quite a bit. At one point they lived with us, and I know at other points we gave them a lot of, we used to bring them food and money, and we helped them out quite a bit. Yes. Yeah, and he did that until he died. I think he died in 39, my uncle. And then my aunt and my cousin lived with us. They came to live with us. That's when we moved over here on Marlboro into a bigger home, and they lived with us. My aunt went out to work for a big family, a cousin's family, and she finally met somebody else and she got married again, an American. Yeah. So then she still lived in, they still lived in the neighborhood. They were still always close. They were always close to Auntie. She was always Auntie. Yes. Yeah. And of course, did they also belong to the church down here? No, my aunt did not. No. No. But she was so Swedish to her. It's strange. It is strange, yes. But no, they did not. Was your mother more Swedish than she was? No, they both were about the same. Yeah, they both liked Sweden, although my aunt was not like my mother. My mother was a very aggressive, domineering woman. My aunt was not. So she was more adaptable. She liked America. She did not, yeah. Did your mother work at that time or she stayed? No, once in a while she would go out and work as a, she'd wash dishes in a restaurant when she got restless. Top of it all, my mother was also an alcoholic. She had her problems. I don't know what they all came from, but anyway. The last three, those last three kind of hung together, I think. So my mother and my aunt were close because they were, you know, close together in age. And the other girls were, you know, older, and some of them probably were married by the time they were born and not at home. But I think my mother was like that at home. She could be pleasant and happy one moment and grumpy and moody the next, yes. I suppose it's hard to be diplomatic to eight tensions because they're different ages. That's right. How can you apply the right... Yeah, that's right. And if you have one in the end who really needs more attention than some of the others and doesn't get it... You don't want to listen. No, you don't know what kind of problems you're creating. So your mother, she was a little bit independent then? I mean, to come here alone I think was really something. To get on a boat and come here by herself without speaking a word of English. To a strange country, which she did, yes. Oh, yeah, she was really independent and not afraid to tackle anything. No, uh-uh. No, she would do it. Yep. Strong. Uh-huh. She was about 88, I think, when she died. She died after your father then? No, she died after, yeah. Father died at 65. So she lived with you then? No, she... no, we couldn't live with her. We were going to, but it just didn't work out. She lived alone. How did they revolve on you now? Did you have different ideas, I suppose, than she had? Well, of course, I... Because you were American. I wanted to be, yes, that's right. Of course, I never argued with her, but yeah. Because she was Swedish, I didn't want to be that. Mm-hmm, yeah. Did she try to correct you to get the right... No, uh-uh. It didn't work? No, uh-uh. It didn't work. So you were also independent then? Yeah, kind of in that way, yeah. Yeah, uh-huh. But it is funny, yes. How about her sister? Did they argue quite a bit too then? Oh, yeah, they did, yeah, but not about that. No, they argued more about, you know, about how to do things and how to cook certain things, you know. No, uh-uh. It was just about like that. No. How about cooking, though? Did you learn from her then? I did not learn from her because you couldn't learn. You never did anything right. So you get tired and... If you didn't do anything right, you never do it. I watched her, and she was a good cook, very good cook. So I watched her, and in fact, when we got married, my husband, the first meal, and I didn't make gravy, he says, you showed how to make gravy. I said, no, he says, that's ground for divorce. He says, I hate gravy at your house. He says, I thought you made it. I says, it was my mother. No, I did not. I did not cook at home. But I, you know, I saw her, and I learned on my own. So as Nomi's mother did it, she didn't want to interfere instead. No, when she did something, she wanted to do it her way. She wanted the gravy. And she wanted it, whatever she did was right. Her way was better. Yeah, very independent, yeah. Very strong woman, yep. Uh-huh. Yep. So that was growing up in America. That was growing up in America, yep. Uh-huh. Was she, was that actually homesick, though? I don't think she was. She never, never, she did a lot of writing. I mean, they used to write letters to their sisters off, and both of them. And that's another thing, too. My father, during the war, when it was hard in Sweden, you know, the world, we sent money and coffee and sugar, whatever we could. My father always sent that. He was always very generous. To his relations, you understand? That's right. That he did not, no, no, to my mother, to my mother's. Because he had no relations, no. No, uh-uh. He had never met them, no. No. So he, no, he was always very generous. He sent everything that he could, we did, to them. Uh-huh. Always did. Mm-hmm. Yeah. So she did keep in contact with them. I never, you know, she never said, I never heard her say she wanted to go back again. I don't know. And I'm sure in those later years, after we were all gone, I'm sure she could have if she wanted to. Because, you know, my father would have had the money. He wouldn't have had to scrape it together. She didn't talk about you going with her at that time? No, uh-uh. No, and at that point in 1947, I was already married. My brother just got married, and so, yeah. You didn't think you were ready to go? Yeah, uh-huh. No, she never suggested we went, no. In fact, she went by boat in 1947, yeah. Mm-hmm. I think my aunt went, my aunt flew. She went many years later. Uh-huh. Yeah. And now they're all gone. Now they're all gone. Uh-huh. Yep. Uh-huh. Yep. All gone. Yeah. I'm not sure what year he came. That was your cousin? It was another cousin. Another cousin. Yeah, because I only had two cousins in this country. Yeah. He came. His name was Edward Lindstrom. And I'm not sure what year he came. Maybe he came soon after my mother came back. So he came to your family then, or? He stayed with us. Oh, yes, he stayed with us. He stayed with other people. Yes, uh-huh. We had great fun with him. He was a great guy. He played the violin, and he was played He was at all those doings. At the Danish Club, he played with a couple other fellows. There were three of them that played. And he did that. He was also, he didn't like to work too much. And he could. He had a great, he was kind of a smart guy, and he could do You know, when he did have a job, he always had good-paying jobs. But he would work for a while, and then Quit. Then quit. Yeah, he never got married until he was in his 40s. Yeah, so, and he died early, too. He died when he was, oh, I don't know, early 50s, I think he died. Yeah. And no children? Yes, he had two children. Two children. And his son, I heard just now, died, too. His son must have had the same heart trouble. My cousin tells me it ran in that side of the family, among the men. Maybe that's why my other uncle, brother, died early. Maybe that was one of the reasons he had to I don't know. Work a little bit slower or quit. Oh, I don't know, he was a fun-loving guy. You liked to be with him. He was always, you know A musician. Yes, and he was always amusing. You had to talk Swedish to him, though, didn't you? No, no, he knew English. No, uh-uh. Never had to talk Swedish to anybody. All these fellows, all these people that my parents associated with, they all knew English. That's what gets me when it comes to some of these other races, why they can't learn English. They adopted fast, I mean. They adopted fast. We never, I never had any problem. Some of them, their accents were a little thicker and it was hard, but no, they always seemed to want to learn English quickly when they came here. Yeah, no problem. I never did, after speaking Swedish to anybody. I wouldn't have anyway, I couldn't. So they don't, they didn't offer Swedish in high school? No, no. There was not that many, yeah? No, uh-uh. So you actually didn't see too many Swedish boys in your relations? No, that's right. Uh-huh, no. And friends, and friends of my family, couples that my parents knew that had children. And we got together, you know, occasionally, once a week or, they were great card players. Pinochle. Oh, I see. Uh-huh, and poker, yeah. They were some, as I said, they were. They liked to do that, yes. They liked to play cards. So there was always a group that got together. And that was, you know, men and women and children. The whole family? Yeah, the whole family came together, yeah. And then you had to listen to Rådströms higher chats. Oh, I don't know, I guess I did. Do you remember that? Not very well, no. Not too well. You were not interested in it? No. Were they Democrats, the Swedes that you? I never really knew. You never thought of it? Never thought of it, I don't know where they were, if they were, it's interesting. They were, I suppose. I don't know, maybe they were Democrats, they were union men, I guess, eventually. Yeah, maybe they were, uh-huh. I'm sorry, sorry, I never asked my father more about his background, but he never talked about it. I knew he was a sailor because he had a great big tattoo on his arm. But he never talked about that time? Never talked about that time. I knew he had been in London, I knew he had been in South America, but that's it. Never talked about his background. I knew he had a hard time in Sweden. He talked about his confirmation. The priest they had, or the, you know, the pastor, was so tough. They all hated him. You couldn't make him at the stake. Yeah, that's about it. Yeah, life was hard. Yeah, his mother died in an accident, but he didn't say how he saw it, and that was it. His father had died earlier, and then she died, and then he decided to leave. There was nothing there. I guess evidently they had no relations. He never talked about any. So that was it. So, he was writing a diary, you said. How many years has he done that? Well, I don't know when he started, but he has done that. I'm not sure now. Different happenings than what he's doing. Yeah. Is he including also his trip to Sweden then when he found out? I suppose he must have, yeah. But at the moment his wife is dying, so, yeah. She is a young person, too, then. Fifty-nine. Yep. So otherwise, I'd have you talk to him, but I don't think so. Yes. And he still has contact with Sweden. See, he's the only one. He talks to his cousin by phone, he calls her, and she is well in her 80s. But he said she's a marvelous woman. She showed them all over Stockholm because she lives in Stockholm, and she never got tired, and I think she must be about 88. They got tired, but she didn't. She walked all over the city and showed them everything. So he does call her. He calls her occasionally on the phone, yep, on Sundays. He gets the latest news? He gets the latest news about all the relatives that are left, yeah. What about his kids? Are they interested in Swedish background? No, they're not. Not really. I mean, they get it from their father, but they're not, no, I don't think so, no. They don't ask any questions either, do they? I don't think so, no. Well, they don't have to ask any questions about their parents because they know their father is writing it all down for them. They know everything, yeah. He is preparing for the future. He is, yes. They all know everything for them and for their kids, yep. Yep.