 The 15th of July, 1987, I'm sitting here with Pastor Joseph Conrad in Rockford, Illinois. And he was born 10th of June, 1899 in Towns Falls, Minnesota. And now you are residing here in Rockford. Can you tell me a little bit about your parents? He was a pastor in Augustana. Yeah, my dad. He was ordained in 1892 in Lindsberg, Kansas. And most of his education was, of course, in this country because he didn't have much education in Sweden. So like high school and college and seminary all went together, I might say at that time. How old was he when he came here? He was 16. But then he worked for, he worked in Kansas for a farmer relative and also in South Dakota before he decided to become a pastor. So he was a little bit older, I think, when he became a pastor. Let's see, 1892 and he was born in 1860. That would be 32. Just about the same as I was. I was ordained in 31. Really, I think he was the same age as I was when he was ordained. You see, I went through, I didn't plan on being a pastor all the time. So when he came at 16, was he alone or did he come with his parents? No, he came alone in 1876. 1876. Yeah, he was 16. He was born in 18... And he came then through some relation of his? Yeah, there was some relative in Kansas. In Kansas. Is that correct? And I think this relative helped him to come over financially. Did he come from a large family? No, not very large. I'm not too sure. At least there were three that I know of. Nils, and then there was a girl. Mary. So it was a small family at Uspi. So he came from a farmer's place? His father was a farmer there? I really don't know what his father did. He must have been a farmer, I think. And, see, we grow up, you know, and you don't ask questions, and you don't find out, and after they're gone, then you don't find out anything. He came then through Kansas. Was he close to Lindsborg at that time, or Salina? Well, I don't remember exactly where it was, but Lindsborg, of course, was a very strong Swedish settlement. So it could have been close to Lindsborg. How long did he continue to work on the farms there, then, before he started to get interested? Well, he, you see, he was ordained in 1892, and I don't know how many years he went to school, maybe five years, but this is a guess on my part, that he went to Gustavus Adolphus College in St. Peter. So he was up in the Dakotas then? Yeah, he was in Dakota working on the farm with a relative of his brother, and that was a brother Nils, yeah. He came over later? He came over at a different time, I think. But anyway, he was converted there in South Dakota and decided to become a pastor. So then he went to Gustavus. That was the first institution, I think, that he went to and made up whatever he had to make up, you know. Did he go to the Northwestern? No, there was later a Northwestern College in Fergus Ross. They were started in 1902. I think it was called Augustana College at that time. Oh, yeah, in Rock Island. In Rock Island, yeah. But they had another college out there in Fergus Falls, Northwestern. No, he didn't have anything to do with that. No, I remember all that was known. Augustana College, and then seminary was at Rock Island, Augustana Seminary, same seminary that I went to and the same college that I attended, Gustavus. So after ordination then, he got his first parish? His first parish was in Minneapolis. Minneapolis. Yeah. Then he met your mother in Swedesburg because he preached there. Well, he was ordained in Lindsberg, 1892. He preached his first sermon when he came back to Swedesburg. He had met my mother there when he was at the seminary. So your mother was at Augustana also? No, no. He went out there to preach to Swedesburg. She never went to college. He was trying to find a seminary. Yeah, so he got acquainted with her over weekends, you know. And then in 1892, in June, I think, they must have been married in June. So when he preached a sermon maybe the following week, he got married. And then they moved to the first call in Minneapolis. I can't recall the name of that church now, South Minneapolis. And then he moved to Cannon Falls where I was born. And the children were born, of course, in Minneapolis, Cannon Falls, and Leeds, South Dakota. He had a charge there for a while. And then finally his last one was at Stockholm, Minnesota, outside of Coquero. Stockholm was out in the country. So we're talking about Leeds, you know. There's one congregation that's gone. They spent it a few years ago. Do you remember Leeds? Which one? Leeds, South Dakota. You remember that. Oh, Leeds, South Dakota, yeah. Were you old enough to remember when you were there? I was a child when I was there. How old? Well, I must have beenóI was born in Cannon Falls. I must have been aboutówell, about six years old when we left there. Do you remember that other place? It looked likeó I rememberó There was silver mining out there. Yeah, it was a gold mine. A gold mine, too? Yeah. I don't understand the arsenage is still there. Yeah, two boys were born there, and they called them the two nuggets. So they were born there, and I was stillóI attended kindergarten there, and I was six years old when we came to Stockholm. How large of a congregation was it? Forty-five, fifty members out there? Were. In Leeds? Oh, in Leeds? I wouldn't have any idea. Because they were all miners. They were miners, yeah. And he served at least in another town besides Leeds. It was scattered. The Swedes were scattered around. There was a lot of distance between the carriages out there. Yeah, there was. But at that time, he had horses, I suppose, and a buggy, and rode with horses and buggy. How about the wintertime? Do you remember theó I don't remember anything about the winter. Oh? It must have been blowing and cold out there. I just barely remember that I attended kindergarten, and I don't have any memories from Leeds. So then he went to Stockholm. Stockholm, outside of Kokedo. It was in the farming district, soó It was out in the country, and he was there for 27 years. And there's where he retired then, after 27 years. And then he went to Minneapolis and lived in Minneapolis, South Minneapolis. But that was quite a big congregation in Stockholm. Oh, in Stockholm. Yes, I thinkó Oh, I would think there were 400 adult members. It was a large congregation. And it was a stable congregation. It was very little movement. No. And the Swedes that come in thereó Very few people outside of Swedes in that whole area. They were all out there in the country. And they stayed there, year after year after year? Year after year after year. Generation after generation. And even the next generation, they would take over the farm when their dad died. And Kokedo nearby, there was a Swedish congregation there too. So did you go to school then in Kokedo? Kokedo, yeah. High school? High school, yeah. How did you get into school then? Did you have to use a horse? Well, it was four miles. Sometimes I would walk or run or ride bicycle or sometimesó A pony? I never rode a horse, no. But my dad would take us in sometimes. So this is about four miles, you said? Yeah, four miles. Stockholm. So most of the time, I went back and forth day by day. But then sometimes during the winter, Iíd stay in Kokedo. How about your sisters and brothers, did they also go to high school then and on to college? Oh, yeah. All of them went through Kokedo. And one brotheróno, two, letís say Evald went to Gustavus and Milton. There were three brothers, four of us that attended, four of the boys attended Gustavus. But heóI donít think heó Did he go to Oxford? I think he went to Minneapolis, yeah. So four of them attended Gustavus and graduated. And then I taught school forótaught high school. Well, before you went to Augustana, a seminar. Yeah, before I went to seminar, yeah. I see. So your intention was to be a teacher then? Yes, I was going to be a teacheróI was a teacher when I came out, and I didnít have any idea of becoming a pastor. But then I moved to Minneapolis, and I came in contact with the church there and with friends and made a decision to attend the seminar. You were out to work for contractors. Yeah, I worked for a building contractor in the office. So at that time, my classmates at seminary, they had all kinds of backgrounds, you know. One came from Canada. Butóso at that time, of course, there wereóthey came from Swedish communities usually. So when you went to the seminary then, it was still required to preach in Swedish in 1931 or in 1930s? When I was in seminary, they were still preaching Swedish, I think, in most of the churches. At least my dad, I think before I left high school, I think he preached every Sunday in Swedish. I was confirmed in Swedish. And then at Gustavus, they had one English-speaking congregation, but the largest one was the Swedish. The First Lutheran? First Lutheran, yeah. So there was all Swedish then in 1920s when you went to college at that time? Well, it was all English in the college, of course. Oh, yes, I understand that. But I mean, at the church, there was one sermon in Swedish. Well, you could eitheróI attended mostly the English service with other fellows, but the main church was the Swedish. In your case, you had no trouble to speak or understand Swedish because your home was bilingual. No, I was confirmed. You see, my grandmother lived with us when I was younger, too. Your father's father? My mother's mother from Swedensburg. And we had to talk Swedish to her, and we had to talk Swedish to my dad. But of course, in school, public school, in high school, we just conversed as a whole in English. So Swedish, I could converse up to a certain extent and understand everything. So your father, no, but he was 16 when he came? 16, yeah. You would think he would transfer over to English as an easy language for him, but he kept the Swedish then. He spoke English no problem. He spoke English very, very well. Because he was a young man. How are they a transferó Now, at Gustavus, whether the classes were conducted in Swedish or English, I really don't know at that time. You mean for your father? It could be that they were conducted in Swedish. You see, there were students besides those planning for the ministry. But as far as my dad was concerned, his ministry entirely, Cannon Falls, and I suppose in Leed, too, as far as I know, it was in Swedish, and Stockholm after several years, then it became English, except that they always had a Swedish yule, I think. They continued that way. So your grandmother, no, mormor, she spoke Swedish all the time. Oh, yeah. Was she able to understand English, though? Maybe to some extent, but she didn't act like she understood. She didn't like English. She wanted to talk Swedish. So she reacted with English, then? So I suppose she understood some English, but I don't remember. And your mother's mother, now, or her parents, they came from Sweden. From what part of Sweden? They came, well, let's see. I don't know what part they came from. Let's see. That was John Peterson. John Peterson was his— I thought they all were Skåne. Well, they were in Skåne, yeah. They came from Skåne. Your mother's parents, too? Both my dad and my mother's parents came from Skåne. But they had no knowledge of each other in Skåne? No, I don't think so. No, I think that my mother lived in a different town. But somehow my grandfather got acquainted with her, so they might have been close by. Or they get together. How about grandpa, now, on your mother's side? Did he die in Iowa, in Switzerland? Yeah, he died quite early, quite young, because I know at least when I was six or seven or eight, she came to live with us, and she lived with us through the rest of her life. So she didn't have any connection with Sweensbury after that, then? They sold the farm there? No, except that she was buried there. In Sweensbury? Yeah. With her husband? When she died, they took her to Sweensbury. So she's buried together with many of her children and, I suppose, grandchildren. So then you changed your line of occupation and became a student of theology. Yeah. Do I understand? Yeah. How did it come about, now? I attended a church in Minneapolis, and I went through a spiritual experience, you see. And I had a friend who was also working for a contractor, and he was planning on attending the seminary, and that sort of influenced me, so we went down together for the first year. And somehow I decided on becoming a pastor, although I hadn't thought of it when I was teaching school. Your dad didn't encourage you to be a pastor? No, no. He didn't encourage because he believed that a person should make up your own mind. How about your other brothers? One other brother became a pastor. What was his name? Evald. And he became a pastor in Minneapolis, in one of the—well, it was quite a large church there. And he was at the head of a— Lutheran Evangelistic Movement. Evangelistic Movement. And he was a Trinity, organized Trinity, church in South Minneapolis. Oh, yeah. Lutheran Evangelistic Movement. And then he traveled around, you know, besides being a pastor at Trinity. So was it at Dagestan that you changed your name to Conrad? No, no, I changed it to Minneapolis because—mostly because there was another fellow working. His name was Liljegren, which was a difficult name. And there were so many Johnsons that if I do it over again, I don't think I would change it. At that time, I did. And there were three of us that changed the same name, Conrad. How about your brother, though? Evald Conrad, yeah. And Milton. And Milton Conrad. So one brother, he kept— He kept the name Johnson, yeah. So at Dagestan, there were a lot of people—most of the students were born in Sweden at that time. There were not too many born in—I mean, born in the United States at that time. Oh, yeah. They were born in the United States when I was there. Because that's— Maybe with a couple of exceptions. There may have been a few that were born in Sweden. And then they came through schools and went to Gustavus. Were you married before you entered the seminary? No. No, I accepted my first call to Greeley, Colorado, and there's where I met her. After I was ordained. So I was a little bit older when I was married. So—and when—they couldn't marry before ordination either, was there? No, I don't think so. It was kind of a taboo. It was not a written rule, though, but there was a— No, there was one man that was married and had about six children and came to the seminary. Oh, yeah. Best friend. Oh, yeah. My roommate came from Canada, and he was married and his family lived— Oh, some distance from Rock Island with his father. His father was a pastor. What was his name? Edquist. Edquist. Bertel Edquist. But he was ordained and then became a pastor? Yeah. He was in my class. Then he had to preach Swedish in Colorado. Once a month. Yeah, and then in Greeley, Colorado, I preached once a month to begin with. So did you go to the Swedish classes then at the seminary besides being in the seminary? Yeah. In the same way at Gustavus Adolphus, they had classes in Swedish. In Swedish. And you attended those? I was asked to attend the Swedish classes. So there I got quite a background in Swedish. And at that time there was Andrean, of course. He was the high priest of the Augustana. Yeah. Both the seminary and the college at that time. I think— And was Dr. Lindbergh there was the— Lindbergh was the dean of the seminary, yeah. Conrad Lindbergh. Conrad Lindbergh, yeah. So you came out in 1931, the worst of times. Yeah. That was a depression. Depression. Felt any regret of being stored in that business? I mean, going in some pastures, you better be in the business. Regret of going in? Yeah, because there was an uncertainty, I mean, to be taking care of the congregation at the time because the collection place were less empty. Oh, yeah. The salaries were low. But somehow— A hundred dollars a month, weren't they? Yeah, I think so. When we got married, it was about 140 when we got married and went to Denver. Yeah. So you met Dr. Negrilli. Negrilli. It was the first time you saw him? I was in his first adult confirmation class. I was not a Lutheran. I was a United Presbyterian. Oh, I see. So you were of the Swedish background then? No, I'm Polish. I see. So you went to the Swedish church? Yeah, well— How come? Well, I'll tell you, he happened to take rooms at my mother's house. I was living in the state of Washington, and he took two rooms, you know, big deal. And so then when I came home, we met. We started playing tennis together. We've been married 51 years now. Oh, I see. So we got married in 1935. So he was active in athletic tennis? Oh, we played tennis until 1982. So you played tennis at the college then? Oh, yeah. Let's see, was I on the— At the seminary? I can't remember if I was officially on the team, but I certainly played tennis with the rest of the fellows who were— if I became the college team, whether I got on the college team or not, I can't remember that I did that. I don't think so. How about the seminary? Could you play tennis there too? To some extent, yeah. I played tennis until I was 80 up in Superior. So I played all through my ministry, I played tennis. In 81, we wouldn't play maybe 20 minutes, you know, not a full set. No, that was too much, but we would not play. So did you know tennis too then when you— Oh, yeah. You learned how to— I learned a lot more after I started playing. That's the way we got acquainted, really. So he rented two rooms? He rented two rooms. My mother had rooms for rent, and she was a widow, so that was a big deal. Why did you rent the two rooms? One for the office and one for the bedroom. Oh, I see. The office. She came back from the state of Washington. See, her sister was ill, and that's one reason why she moved out to Washington. My mother had to get me away because I was— And then I moved from their house and had a room somewhere else. Closer to the church. Closer to the church. They didn't have a parsonage then. I don't believe—no, they didn't even own a parsonage. So you invited your wife to be then to come to church for the Bible class? Oh, yeah. Yeah. Because your mom and I—she must have been Catholic or— No, she's Baptist. Oh, Baptist. Baptist. This kind of unusual for a Polish— Well, they were living near Warsaw. Well, she really was German. She spoke German, Polish, and Russian. And she taught German to a Polish family in Warsaw. So then she came and she taught herself and then came—immigrated by herself with her sister. Now, she was raised in—she was born in Germany. She was really born in Germany, but she lived in Poland, so she was really a Polish citizen. But the family spoke German. There's quite a bit of transition around in that area. And your father, he came to Michigan? My father died when I was nine months old, and he lived in Michigan. And he has relatives in Georgia, which I've never met. I think he has relatives. He left home and went to—went to high school in Georgia to live with his grandfather. I don't know much about my father. See, there were a lot—at that time, Swedish people came over here, and they settled in certain communities, and they would meet people from other communities, naturally. And so they'd get married to someone that they didn't know in Sweden. So you also had a church, the one in Alt, too? Yes. In Alt? Alt. Yeah, when they didn't have a pastor. Alt, Colorado. Oh, yeah, Alt, Colorado. Yeah, they didn't have a pastor. So I got a pastor finally, I think, for them. And then I—well, then I moved—then we moved to Denver, where we got married. When we got married, we moved to Denver. Augustana? No, Bethany. Oh, Bethany. That's the one that— That's the one—yes, East 32nd and Yelpon. You see, Lorimer was pastor of the Augustana Church, if you've heard that name. Yes, yes. And Dr.—who was my predecessor? Oh, dear, I can't remember his name. I haven't thought of him for a long time. Axtell. Axtell, yeah. And, of course, in Denver, I can't remember if I had one Swedish service a month. I don't think so. Or how it was. Or I might have had one English and one Swedish service every Sunday. I know I had—the Swedish service was at the same time as the English that Sunday, because college students—there was a college there. I would have to tell them they'd have to attend some other church. That was in Greeley. Yeah, Greeley. So you served then as a chaplain for the sanatorium in Denver? No. For the Swedish sanatorium? No, no. It was just located very close to— South. —of the south, in Baylor. At that time, we were in East Denver. East Denver. Bethany Church. And then after Denver, then I got a commission in the Army as a chaplain. During the war? 1941, yeah. During the war. Pearl Harbor? Just before Pearl Harbor, I got an assignment in Texas. And then I stayed—I was in for four years. Four and a half years. Yeah, one year overseas. So you moved with them then? You moved back to Denver then. When I went overseas, yeah. So I was chaplain in France mostly. In Paris, even. And then he came back— I was a hospital chaplain in Paris. —to Denver, and he got a temporary call and was in Duluth for about six months. And then we got the call— When I got back, yeah. And we got the call to—in 1946, we got a call to Rockford. So I was pastor in Rockford from 1946 until 1968. Twenty— In Rockford until I left. But I think we were— You left, huh? Yeah, but finally I think it was all in English, otherwise except for society. It was a different organization. Yeah, there were maybe a couple of songs in Duluth. Yeah. You spoke Swedish at the Duluth, huh? Oh, sure. Yeah. So was the consulate at that time favorable to keep the Swedish language going? Oh, yeah. There was a strong sentiment to keep— For the Swedish. For the Swedish to continue. And in Denver, because of the young people and people who didn't understand, we didn't have Swedish at the regular time on Sunday. It was all in English, except that we'd have a Swedish service after the English service. And we did that here, too. Our Swedish would be at 11.15 at here at Lyons. Yeah, at Lyons. After the English service. Yeah, that's what I was talking about earlier. And the Swedish choir, Swedish Brotherhood, and many guilds, Swedish guilds. They didn't have a Swedish. Swedish. And then we had a Swedish society, and a lot of guilds, they called them, small groups of Swedish meetings. But how about the young people not coming up? Were they eager to join the ladies' aid and the female party in Swedish? I mean, they didn't understand. No, the young people didn't. They didn't attend any of these, except maybe Yulotta. Yulotta, unless the people died off. Yeah. More and more. You see, all the young people were they didn't speak Swedish in their homes, finally, you know. And confirmation was in English. All of my confirmation in Rockford was in English because of a lot of youngsters who couldn't. And then at Christmas they started emphasizing the Christmas Eve service, which was all English, of course. And Yulotta was Swedish. Christmas Day. Yeah, we'd have our English at 11 o'clock at night in the evening and the Swedish in the morning. You're probably aware of Pastor Seedorf, the first Lutheran. He was known as being a very stubborn. Yeah, I heard of him because he was there before, but I heard of him a lot. He came there before Dr. Roth. He wanted everything to be in Swedish. Yeah, he was very insistent. And so because of his insistence, they lost many families, so there were other churches like Trinity and other churches that started with a full English program. This was a natural consequence. I've married in many places. So, but like the Trinity Church down here on Longwood? Trinity Church. It's on 2nd Street or 1st and right off of Jefferson. Yeah, yes. But that was founded by the Americans, though. There were no Swedish people founding that one. Yeah, but we see the growth. It didn't belong to the Augustana Synod. It belonged to another synod. Only in English, of course. Bextran. Who was there before Bextran? He was so popular. Anyway, Bextran served as an associate under him for many years. I can't remember who it was. It was a Swede. Yes, and then Bextran's son, Bextran Jr., or the second. But they had no connection with the Swedish. And also, Emanuel Church started with people who came who wanted English. So, First Lutheran and Zion were really the only churches that kept up the Swedish longer. Because, well, the largest number of them were Swedish people, of course. But then through intermarriage, it married outside of the Swedish. And these couples would want to have a Lutheran church in English. So Emanuel Church was only two blocks away from our church. That was in English. No Swedish at all. Of course, many members were of Swedish origin. A lot of professional people went to Emanuel Church. Maybe still do. I see. A lot of doctors. Yeah. The Zion, I guess they called them bunder in Sweden. I mean, there were people from the country and farmers and so on. Working class, yeah. There were very few professional people. Well, there were very few professional people that came over. Why was it like that? You think religion will erase those lines of professions? They may have felt more comfortable, you know, more of them over there or what. I don't know really why that was. You being an outsider, you know, you could be a judge of that. How was the Swedes? Oh, they were very critical of him marrying anyone that was not Swedish. In Greece, when you met him? Oh, I imagine, yes. Of course, there were many old men. Oh, at that time. You were not supposed to marry someone else. Oh, no. Oh, no, especially the pastors, most of them married. How about your parents? What did they say when you dated? Well, they went along with it and had a big wedding. I had my brother come from Minneapolis to perform the ceremony, in English, of course. And then we went to Denver for our first parish together. But I suppose it was not easy for you to join the ladies' aid and be the chairman. Well, I wasn't exactly the chairman, but I had entertained them in my parish. Because that would usually be the case, though, that the wife actually worked harder than the pastor many times to keep things together in the office. Of course, this church had been so, it was so sad. The pastor took, he took everything. He took the towel holders. Were you in Greeley? In Greeley, no, in Denver. In Denver. There was friction. And they took the rose bushes. They just took everything. The ex-dels, Dr. Ex-Del. Oh, yeah. They just took everything in the house. There wasn't one light bulb or a piece of coal to burn. It was during the Depression, then. Yes. Well, you see, there was a disagreement. I mean, there was trouble between the congregation and the pastor, Ex-Del. So finally, there were only seven that came on Sunday morning. So when I accepted the call, there were seven people attending the morning service. But that was because the pastor was kind of a roughneck. So you were a trial preacher for seven people? Huh? I preached? A trial preacher for seven people. For seven people. No. No. I spoke at an English communion service once by invitation. I see. And then when they called me, they called me, and then the Swedish, they knew that I could preach Swedish once a month. So you didn't have to preach two sermons to get the call? Oh, no. No. I suppose they wanted someone who could speak Swedish. I don't think so. Once a month. Do you remember Irvin Stenman met you in Colorado? Yeah. In a Bible camp at Estes Park or something? Yeah. And he talked to you about coming. But, of course, the understanding was that there would still be one Swedish service a month. And as a student, I had preached Swedish some when I served as a student in the summertime. So I knew Swedish enough so that I could prepare and preach a sermon. So I don't know if that Swedish service once a month, I think it was the same time. So they didn't put it at a different hour. So your predecessor, he moved the bushes with him or roses? Oh, he took everything. He even took the toilet paper holder. Did he continue to be a pastor? No. No, he retired. Oh, he retired from the service. He had a son that was a pastor, too. But eventually, I think, the son withdrew to be a pastor, didn't he, though? Yeah. Still? He was pastor in Pueblo, I think. Was he? Oh, yeah. Well. So you came into a well-cleaned home then. Well, it was painted. They had painted it. But it was a big place, seven rooms. How were they able to support, you know, seven members or thereabouts? Well, we kept getting more in when we came. Well, when we came, then many of them came back, of course. Came back. And then the church grew through my ministry. And, of course, many people that came were not Swedish people who became members. So you got in young people then, too. Yeah, young people. To confirm and marry. So the young people's organization, that was all in English. And that particular area was beginning to be all black. And so after we left, then, at that time. At that time, before? Yes. Oh, lots of black people. And then they, but after we left, then they built the next pastor. They moved out further into the suburbs. South. South. What did you call it? Yeah, there was an Englewood. Englewood, yes. Because there is Bethany, Ohio. They still have not rebuilt their church. You know, it was destroyed by fire. They just put in some beautiful new windows. And it was completely destroyed almost before Christmas. They still don't have their own church to worship in. We have friends. We still correspond. I see. So they have hardships, then, of keeping going. Yes, yes. And meeting in different places. So were this Bethany, though, in competition with the first Lutheran, or the distance was so far apart? Really? No, I mean never. No, in Augustana? No, no, they were too far apart. Because they were moved on Tom. Yes, yes. And I don't know where they are now. Is Augustana, are they still in the same place? Well. Or did they move out? But there was no competition, really. No, no. They had their own ministry in their area. Yeah, that was a bigger congregation. Was it easier for you then to come to Denver? Fairly good, yes. Than to be in Greenby, because there's a small town. Well, we had some wonderful people in the Denver congregation that came back and guided us. Many of them, of course, were English. Yes. Like the Stenmans. There was a Stenman pastor in them. It was the grandparents mostly in the church who were Swedish. Yes, Stenman, who was pastor in, oh, not in Glenview, but Glen Ellen. And he's a son of one of the staunch pillars in the Denver church. And he's a real nice, great guy, doing well. No, so as far as the organizations were concerned, they were all, most of them were English. Yes, yes. Even Ladies Aid and the? Oh, yes, yes, it was all English. And Missionary Society. Yeah. They had their beliefs in being conservative, I suppose. We had really a pitiful salary. We were trying to get furniture. I know we paid like $5 a month on our furniture bill because we didn't have any furniture. And in those days, everybody gave their furniture to the Salvation Army. So that was it. We went through just about like everybody was going through the Depression, you see. But it was probably harder for a pastor to come in from place to place. I'd say a little bit, yes. So you were in Greenville most of the time during the Depression? I was, yes. I grew up and graduated from. Yeah, but he was a Dane on 1931. 1931. I graduated from high school in 1933. Okay. So he came then to 31 to Greenville. And then we were married in 36, or 35. 35. So I left in 35. And went to Denver. Well, you see, I went through a period of time when it was a transition period, kind of a transition period. So the seminary classes were all conducted in English. And so in the seminary, they had no Swedish. Well, they had one Swedish class maybe in the seminary. How was the life in there between the seminary and the people? When you came to a congregation like Rockford, you know, and I was there, and, oh, we can take Swedes, we are. Well, you had a tremendous concentration of old Swedes still living. And they were all set to hear the Swedish singing and the prayers and everything like that at funerals. How did the seminary react to that? Did they understand that feeling of tradition that was supposed to be preserved, or did they push the English on them? No, the seminary just accepted every congregation, you know, the way they wanted it. And they didn't emphasize from the seminary. They knew the future was English. But they didn't push it, though? They didn't push it, no. No, there was no persuasion. There were many seminary students who couldn't speak Swedish. So they had trouble in coming out to some of the congregations, I suppose. Yeah, well, they might come out, but there might be a retired pastor or somebody, or they come from the seminary and preach the Swedish. So when you got the call then from Zionaire, you didn't know anything, you knew the background, but did you know that it was Swedish? No, I knew that there would be Swedish once a month. Like Dr. Brandel, for instance, did you know him? Yeah, I knew Dr. Brandel. Did he say anything about Zion, that it was a real Swedish concentration? No, he didn't exercise any. There was no pressure on the churches in regard to language. The pastor that was there made the decision about what he should do about English and Swedish. So when you came in then to the church council in Rockford, 1946, did they tell you that? It was all in English. It was all in English, then? Yeah, the church council. And the confirmation classes were all English. Did they have any wish list, so to speak, that you should perform Swedish services so often? Well, yeah, they had an understanding that we'd have Swedish once a month to begin with. Once a month? Yeah. And I think it was at the same, let's see, I'm trying to think of different churches. I know in Greeley I'd meet college students at the door, and I'd have to tell them to attend another church. But in Denver, they might have had one Swedish service a month, but not very long, because I knew that to reach the community, you have to have an English service every Sunday at the same time. But here in Rockford, you've got a lot of Swedes here. Oh, yeah. So did they press you on it? Oh, yeah. During my ministry there, we had Swedish once a month, and after the English service, though. And sometimes I would preach or we would have a visiting pastor. How about the funerals? Did you meet them? The funerals were all in English, except maybe some scripture passages were read in Swedish. They wanted that? In Swedish, some from the Bible. But my sermon and the service was always in English. But because they requested some passage in Swedish, I would read it. When you visited people in their homes or in the hospital being sick, did they request you to read the Swedish prayer or something? No. Right now, you see, I'm retired, and I visit to some extent. But even when I was here, my visits at the hospital, I might read a Swedish passage, but my visit would be in English. I see. And reading, my sermon would be in English. But they don't request you to read the prayer when you come to their homes or in the hospital, for instance? No. There was hardly any request for Swedish. They left that up to me. So you stayed there in 1969? 68, really. 68, yeah. And you retired? Then I was close to the age of 70, you see. And then I got a call to Duluth for a few months. And then Superior, that was of a Norwegian background. Of course, that was all in English. So being an interim pastor then before you got another one? Then I finished my ministry. Well, I spent eight years there as a pastor. But that belonged to the American Lutheran Church, which is a... Like ALC. ALC is the Norwegian. And of course, the big shots, they didn't like to have an Augustana pastor there. They were conservative. But the congregation wanted me. They had contacted me when I was in Duluth. How did you get that feeling that they didn't like you, the big shots, like Proust and...? Well, you see, it was the church council had the authority. And they could come in and advise them. But they'd say, No, no, we want Pastor Conrad. And the big shots couldn't do anything about it because they had the authority. Is there any difference though between ALC or Augustana at that time, or LSTA? Well, not much difference except the Norwegian, spiritually, they had a different... They had a stronger emphasis on conversion and Bible study and so on. Most of the Lutheran Bible Institute in Minneapolis, they were pastors from the ALC. So they are more conservative than Augustana, you think? ALC? Were they more conservative? They were more conservative spiritually, yeah. Were they more like the Missouri Lutheran? No. Not that much? No, they were more evangelistic. They believed in Bible study and personal testimony and a personal experience of Christ, which was not emphasized in the Augustana. They were something like the Baptists then? Yeah, only the form of the service was still liturgical. So it wasn't like the Baptists in that sense. It was just that they had a different spiritual emphasis among their leaders. You see, I don't know if you've heard of Hollisby in Norway, but there was more of a revival movement in Norway, I think, than in Sweden. Like the Ryder movement then? Yeah. How has the church changed now over the years since you became ordained in 1931 and we have 1987 now? What is the most changes? They're a little bit more liturgical, if you know what I mean. More strict on that? They're more like the state church in Sweden. Well, they call them liturgical because they emphasize the liturgy more than the Augustana Synod did. The Augustana Synod had a simple service. Who brought this more conservative activity in Norway, the liturgical service? The young ones or some outsiders? Well, the people that came from Norway were influenced more by Hollisby. But like the regular NCA now? They brought in the sign of the cross and things like that. It's more Catholic oriented. Yeah, a little bit more like the Catholic. How did they come about? Because it's the last 20 years they've come on. Now, my dad, he had a very simple, the Augustana service was quite simple. It was liturgical, all right, and an altar service. But all the signs of the cross and a lot of these things that go along with the Catholic church, I mean, has been brought in more. Because there was a saying when the Swedes came to Sweden in the 1850s, 1860s, 1870s, they wanted to get rid of the Swedish church and come to a more freer. So Augustana brought about that freedom, like you said, your father was a simple service. Why did they go away from that then? Well, it was just the younger generation came up and I don't know what the influence was, but there was more simplicity in the Augustana Synod. And I think the people that came over belonged to these people who met in homes and had prayer services and so on. Like the people in Lynchburg, Kansas, they were, Michel and friends, quite a few of them. So that's really what, as long as that continued, but then the younger generation and colleges and so on, seminary became more liturgical. So how do you think it now as an old pastor and your age group, do you go along with it or do you think? No, I'm more conservative because of my background. In other words, I'm not very happy about the way the church is going. The Augustana Synod sort of represents my idea of a church. And it's hard to get out of that. You still have that within you. It was spiritual. The sermons were very based on God's word and they preached repentance and faith in Christ and so on. And so I came out and then I attended the Lutheran Bible Institute where they emphasized Bible study and personal experience and personal testimony of your faith. But that was never emphasized within Augustana though, personal experience so much. The what? That was not emphasized by Augustana though. Not the Augustana Synod. No, because they were too close to the missions then, the mission friends and the Baptists. Yeah, they were pretty close, except that they still had a liturgical service, an altar service. But the altar service was very simple. My dad would start out with healing, healing, healing. I think it was based mostly on the church in Sweden. Holy, holy, holy, healing, healing, healing. But it would be a short liturgical service and the simplicity of it was a simple liturgical service. But it was inside of the altar, of course. Not like the Baptists, they believed in just having a speaker stand up in front and so on. They didn't have a regular liturgical service. Do you know Reverend Ellis Youngdahl? He lives in Rock Island. Ellis Youngdahl, I know the Youngdahl family. He comes out of them. There was Reuben that was pastor of a large church in Minneapolis. And Luther Youngdahl was governor. And he was in my fraternity at Gustavus. And we had a fraternity, although they were against it, fraternity, secret society. You still had it? We still had it, yeah. So you were rebels? I was a rebel, yeah. How did you get away with that? Well, they couldn't do much about it, I guess. They decided to go along with it. Why do you think young people do like that? Is that to test the water, you know, how far you can go? Or why is it done? Well, at that time we were regular. The college students, they weren't particularly spiritual. I mean, they liked a good time, and many of them went to dances, and they went bowling, and they played cards and so on, which the old Augustana Synod had been against, you see. But the young people were coming in to the colleges, and so it was a different emphasis. So those old rules and regulations, any of them can be turned over if you have the majority, showing an interest for something else? Well... How many were you in this secret society at Gustavus? In the secret society? Yeah, at Gustavus. Oh, yeah. Well, we had a regular, they called them debating societies, and then we would meet somewhere, you know, secretly. And the faculty wouldn't know anything about it? But they knew that we were existing. They were against it, but they couldn't get it out. They couldn't do much about it, or they didn't try. They just let it go. They didn't call your parents or your father about it or anything like that? No. No. I attended dances, for instance, to start with, and then they were against that, and then they would notify the parents. So we were talking about different times. Different times. Or religion has changed. Dangerous times. Well, as far as most pastors and many members, it's a real spiritual experience in their hearts, but it's just expressed a little bit differently.