 Well, we have 18th of March, 1987. I'm sitting together with Opel Oon of Rockford, Illinois. He was born 1915, the 24th of August in Scottville, Pennsylvania. So your background is of a German Dutch ancestry. Yes. And you were born in Scottville. Your parents, what did they work with? My father was a coal miner, and my mother, of course. In those days, they didn't work. Mothers didn't. They don't? No. You come from a big family? Yes, we were 10 in the family. And we were actually 11, but one died as a baby. And we're all living but one. How many boys and girls? Six boys and four girls. And you are one of the younger ones? Well, I was the youngest for four years. And then they had four more. So you went to school in Scottville because you left when you were eight? I went to school there, but then I went to Iowa when I was eight years old. So I finished school in Iowa. And that's a small town. It's called Dallas. There's a twin city, Dallas and Melcher. And it's about 35 miles south of Des Moines. And there is coal mining district also? Yes, it was. My uncle that raised me was a coal miner, too. Oh, I see. So your whole family was left behind in Scottville? Yes, just me. You were the only one? I'm the only one. So you came to him. Did they have any children? Yes, they had two daughters. But I don't know if you're interested in this or not. They had two daughters. And one graduated from high school. And they were from Pennsylvania, too, my aunt and uncle. So as a graduation present, she was given a trip back to Scottville. And she asked if she could take me back home with her because I was kind of skinny and sickly. So I went back. And I was going to go back in the summer, but instead I stayed. And then I graduated from there. So it was just a matter of never going home. I see. Strange, huh? But there was enough kids back in Scottville, anyhow. They didn't miss me. They didn't miss you? No, they didn't miss me. You went to school down there in Dallas? Yeah. And you finished high school there? Oh, yes. And then I graduated. What did I graduate? 1934. And then about 1936, I came to Brockford. How did that come about, that Dallas? This is so silly for your interview. One time, there was a minister downtown in the church. Let's see, the Court Street Methodist Church. And he was born in Dallas, and his mother lived there. And then there's a place on 9th Street that they take care of children. And that is a sister. They came from where I came from. And anyway, one time they said they were going to go to Rockford. Well, I hadn't heard too much about Rockford. I want to go along. And I said, sure. And I went along, and I didn't hear anything. And one Sunday, they said, well, we're leaving at such and such a time. And I said, OK. So I just came to Rockford. No reason. Spur of the moment. And you stayed there down in Rockford? Yeah. With them, or? I stayed with them for a little while. And then I worked at Ecklund's Old Cafe on 7th Street. And then I got a room of my own. And then at that time, there were a lot of bachelors. They had a counter, and there were stools and stools of bachelors. But Carl happened to be in Sweden at that time. It was your husband that was in Sweden? Yeah. And they kept saying, well, wait till that Swede comes from Sweden. And I can still see when he walked in the door. Why did you have to wait for him? I mean, there was plenty others. Didn't they have a good time? Oh, yeah. They tried, maybe. And that was the first time you come into a bunch of Swedes? Well, no. I told you that one time that where I came from in Dallas, it was mostly Italian. Yes. And then this family of Swedes came. And this is a very small town. And of course, everybody says, have you seen the Swedes? Have you seen the Swedes? Why did they come there? I have no idea. And they were blonde. And of course, then the other ones are dark. So it was quite a turmoil, you know, knowing, have you seen the Swedes? So that's the first time I knew there were Swedish people, really. And there was a family? That was a whole family. And I think they had, I don't know if they had four or five kids or something like that. What kind of work were they doing then? I have no idea what they did. But they actually lived there in Dallas? And one is married to an Italian. And I don't know what happened to them. I have been gone from there for, well, see, since 1936. You know, that's, what, 51 years. So you don't know too much of what goes on. But that family stayed on there in Dallas? They were there as far as I know. I suppose some went, because things got pretty– There wasn't too much work around there. So a lot of them– Was it coal mining? No, they went to Des Moines and worked in the power company. Or they got jobs in Des Moines. So they drove back and forth then every day? Yeah. Just a lot of them drove back and forth. Yeah. So there was the first introduction to the Swedes. It was the first. Although there is another family that was Swedish, but that didn't register. You know, it's only when these came. One lives right around the corner here, not of that family, but of another family that lived there that they were from Sweden, too. And they had– Oh, gosh. I think they had five children. But I think that was about the only– Otherwise, it was a mixture of who knows what in that town. Quite a few Italians. The Italian element was the biggest. So there was only a Catholic church down there in Dallas? No, there was a Catholic church. It was a twin city. And, you know, a street divided them. The Catholic church was in– It was Dallas-Melcher. And the Catholic church was in Melcher. And in Dallas, they had a Methodist church and a Christian church. So you were brought up in the Methodist church down there? Yeah. Although my parents were from the Christian church. Of course, you know, they don't jive too good. At that time, they didn't. Nowadays– At that time, I suppose everything was very strict between each denomination. So when you came here to Rockford, did you have to go to the Methodist church because there were people that brought you here? Or you stayed on your own then? I stayed on my own, and I have not gone to church. And they all recommended Karl Öhn. Why did they do that? I don't know. It was a good choice. So you wonder, of course, who this guy was then when they said– Yeah, yeah. Or rest of the Mary– No, they were bachelors. No, I see if I– Oh, one gave me some roses. A few of them, you know, you probably went out with. But after I saw him, I didn't care for anybody else. So it goes. So he was home for a visit then in 19– Yeah, he was home visiting, yeah. In 1930– I think it was– 38? It must have been about 38, I think. So did you join the IOGT then? I joined before we were married. Before you met them? Yes, yeah. So they introduced you then for the Swedish– Was this the only larger group you joined then? Oh, yeah, that's the only one I joined. You didn't belong to Voss or Vikings? No, I don't belong to any of those. But there was Oscar Smith. I don't know if somebody's talked to you about him. I probably– No, I don't think I heard his name. He was from Trollhattan. At least he had his– Trollhattan. Yeah, and he is the one that asked me to join the lodge. And he has a wife and two, three– three or four kids here. And he was influential in getting me to come into the lodge. And they was in English at the time, or did they speak Swedish most of the time? Both. Both? At the meetings, they used both Swedish? At the meeting, I think it was mostly English. But if you went– They had what they called a sewing circle, and then they spoke Swedish. How did you fit in there, Noa? Did you pick up a few Swedish words because you were young? Not too much. To belong to the sewing circle, or you had to? No, they were pretty good, but some nights they would– Then I'd come home and I'd say, I'm not going anymore. How did you feel, Noa? How did I feel? Did they receive you openly, or were they withdrawn, the Swedes? No, they were not withdrawn at all. They were very nice. But sometimes I felt that they could have been a little more considerate of somebody that didn't speak the language. So they were a little bit– They'd forget themselves. Yeah. And then, you know, it– Of course, the men, they would go one way, and the women would all be sitting in a circle and talking. But that's what they did. Yeah, and then sometimes you felt kind of out of it, but they didn't mean it. They didn't mean it at all, because I don't think you would find a nicer group of people. So they divided themselves, but there was the– Well, the men always did that, you know. They probably went and played cards, you know. Are the nationalities the same thing, you think, during that time the men went– I don't know. I have been with the Swedes. I hardly have very many friends that aren't Swedish. It's been mostly the sole life. So then your husband arrived, and he was coming into the restaurant one day. What happened then? Did they introduce you? Yeah, yeah. And what did he say? He didn't know anything about you. No, he didn't know anything about me. But he had another girlfriend, of course, and he kept– At that time? Yeah, and he kept going down. She worked at the Loudon Farm down in Oregon. You've probably heard of that. Yes. But then eventually, she was gone. She disappeared? Yeah, she still– Was she a Swedish girl? She was Swedish, yeah. She married somebody else then, no? Yeah, she married somebody else, yeah. But I don't know. I see her maybe once every 10, 15 years. I think she's still living. So you got to go steady then and engaged– Yeah, yeah. And married in 1939. Where did you marry then? Where or what? Yeah, what pastor? We went back to my home in Iowa. In Iowa? Yeah, and his name was Smith. And– Emetrist? Emetrist, yeah, and then we had– My aunt had dinner and a lot of the people that I knew were there. And then we went down on a– On Friday, we were married on Friday, and we came back on a Sunday. Went back to work like everybody else, you know. So you didn't take any honeymoon then? No. Were you working at that time when you married? At Eklund's. At Eklund's. On 7th Street. So you continued to work there for Eklund's? Yes, uh-huh. And then, of course, then we had our two girls. Well, I did leave Eklund's, and then they had a– Did you interview Lindy? Yes. Carl Lindy? His wife had the restaurant on Broadway, the Broadway Café. And so I went there. And then I helped at Sweden House. I worked there. When they moved up there? Yeah, uh-huh. Then I worked special parties and things. And that was for the old man, Axel Eklund? Uh-huh. He was still– Well, and then the young one took over. Brother, I suppose you've heard about him, too. Yeah, I heard of him. And he had taken over, yeah. So Axel, then, did he retire then, or what happened? He was still around, but the young one was running it. Yeah. So wasn't he– Didn't he belong to a special organization of religious– Yeah. Yeah, I was– Yeah. So there was a group in Iraq for them, strong enough to have a Swedenborgian church, or– Well, how did they meet? That I don't know too much about, but I know they did. Have you talked to his daughter? No. Oh, she's still living? He has a daughter down here. And you might interview her. I'll tell you about that after. So you continued there, and your husband, Karl now, where was he employed? He was at Rindberg Jacobsen. You've heard of that? Yes. He worked there– Oh, gosh, I don't know, it was 30-some, 40 years he worked there. So he was an experienced– He was a Swiss jigbore operator, and from everybody that knew his work, he was one of the finest. Did he learn there from Sweden, you think, or did he– No, I think he learned here. He started there? He came here, he spoke very– I don't know if he spoke any English, very little. And then he taught himself. He was very precise. He was very good. And then he got a good teacher, you. Yes. He was probably more sufficient in English than most of the Swedish green– He didn't have to learn from us. He was good. No, but he eventually picked up from you, though. I suppose a little, but not that much, because he was very good. Very good. And so you both belonged then to Rockford– To Rockford Lodge. Yeah. Was he an officer in the Lodge? He was secretary for many years. Secretary. Many years. Did you come in to serve as an officer later on? Just now I am the secretary. Did you take over after your husband then? No. No. Holger Williams has been. And then he– Just this year, he didn't want to do it anymore. So we are so few. And so what do you do? You can't let it flounder, you know. So we got a new treasurer and a new secretary, which is me, and Gunnborg Johnson is the treasurer. She was born– Have you talked to her? She was born in Sweden. Her father lived here and her mother. There's a lot of them that you probably haven't contacted. So you felt at home then with Carl and the Lodge workers? Oh, yes. You had no problem to identify with them? No, because I think you talked to most of them. When you came in, you were coming from outside. Did you see anything special about the Swedes? Did they do things in a different way than you were used to? Oh, yeah. I guess you would say they served coffee in the afternoon, which we never did. You never had that? No, no. Well– So there was a new– There was a new experience. What we had most of the time would be– You would come and have a big dinner or something like that. You were invited as part of the family. We had a couple of ladies that were just part of the family. You didn't think anything different of them. So you could visit some of those old-timers then go back and forth, and you're getting acquainted with them in the ways you could– I never felt out of place with any of them. Some people– Some of them were Swedish that felt a little– I don't know what you– Big pardon? Yeah, and– I can explain to you. How are you going to say? They felt a little bit– Yeah, out of place or that they didn't fit in maybe or somebody was a little bit more– Stuck up. Yeah, stuck up. No, I got along fine. I had no problems. The only problem was the language. We have– I just visited a friend in Seminole, Florida. And he loved to talk Swedish. He was born here. And when he was, I think he said, 15 years old, they went to Sweden and were there for not a year. And he and his wife and Carl and I were very good friends. And we would go out together, and of course, he starts talking Swedish. So he forgot himself somehow. No, he didn't forget himself. This is on purpose. He loves the Swedish. And his wife wasn't Swedish either. So we would really light into him. And Carl was never one that would talk Swedish in front of an American or anything. He says, I'm an American now. I won't speak Swedish. Although when he went home, it was perfect English. Swedish, you mean? Swedish, yes. Excuse me. He was a very– He was an intelligent man. Very even-tempered. Married to me. Very even-tempered. So they worked out all right, then? Oh, yeah. Yeah, we got along fine. So what were you doing then at the Rakvord dachse? You met once a month or twice a month? They met twice a month, I think it was. They cut down to once a month. But back in that time, in the 40s, for instance. Yeah, we were so many more, and so many had passed away. We're in that age when everybody passes away. Did you have your own locality to meet into? Or like Vega? No, we never owned a building. So you met at Vega instead? Yeah. They met on 15th Avenue. I think you know that. Yes. And our lodge met there. And then we have met in the homes now for many years. Yeah. Have you been to any of the meetings? Yeah, Vega meetings I've been to. Yeah, but none like ours. Because you meet in the homes. Yeah, we just met this Sunday. So there is still– Like, when your children are, you got two twin– One is here in Rakvord. And one is up in Wisconsin. Yeah. Did they join the lodge too, then? No. No? Why was that? Couldn't you influence them to– No. We never tried, really. And especially now with their lives, they have their own lives. And if they want to go out and have a cocktail or whatever, that's their life, not mine. Different lifestyle. Yeah. I don't think you'll find too many of the younger ones. They joined. They used to have a lodge many years ago where they had young people. Did you know that? Yes. Okay, where the young people were– They disappeared after the Second World War or– Yeah. That was before– Well, I think most of them were about 60 years old now, the ones that were in that group. The way I understand– And this was before I came to Rakvord too, that they had plays and all kinds of wonderful things. But you don't remember that? No, I wasn't in on that so much. They had a special– Svenska Teater Sällskapet, they called it. Margit Eick was one of them. Well, wait a minute– Paul Brust. That person I don't know. You don't remember him, so that was before– That's before my time, yeah. There was, like, Lotta Eklund, you've probably talked to her. Her brother-in-law, Spencer Nelson, had a wonderful voice. And they had plays. They had a minstrel show, I understand, at one time. Some of those men had beautiful voices. But, of course, he's gone, and like I said, there's so many that have gone. So you were able to supply your own show, so to speak? They were. Yeah, at the time before I really joined. What during the war now? Your activities, were they centered around just meeting and keep it going? Just meeting, I think, and going, yeah, mostly. It's strange, though, because at that time, Second World War was probably a letdown for the IOG team, more or less, because people came back and they started to– Well, like Carl now, he didn't have to go. They had a– Deferred. Yeah, he had a job that they felt was essential. I don't think Baker– Baker did go. He went, yeah. And some of the– But some of the younger– They were a little bit older, though, but– They still went. Eighteen and twenty-year-olds when they came out. Wasn't there a trend that everybody was going to drink beer and they started with hard liquor? There was a hard time in– Yeah, but see, we didn't have that many young ones, as far as I know, that would do that. You didn't have that in your lot? No. I can think of one couple, their son went. But as far as drinking, I don't think they did that much. I think a lot of those younger ones were still influenced by their parents. But we had, at one time, when my children were younger, a family that taught square dancing, and then they got a group, and they got a group of outsiders, too. Yes. That came in, but the outsiders weren't interested, the little kids, you know. They just came so they could have a little treat or something. But not too many of the children have belonged to the Good Templar. Holger and Myrtles have, and their one grandchild has joined. But otherwise, there's not too much of it. There's not too much interest in Good Templar. But now it seems to be more wind in the sails, though, because of the– They are tracking down on those drunk driving, for instance, and there's more awareness. So there must have been some seed planted– They finally started to grow up. But you see, here we go to age again, where a person probably should do a lot of petitioning and stuff like that, but– Would you be able to do that, for instance, to the school system, where legislators present petitions? Yeah, they have written letters once in a great while, but not lately, because– Did they pay off, though? I don't think so. So the number was too small? They were too small. The numbers– For instance, look at Vega. They used to be a big group. I don't know if I– They had about 300 members when they were– They had a big– I used to go there, and– I'd get so mixed up on them, because this one was a brother and this was a sister-in-law. I'd come home and I'd say, I can't keep those people straight. So there was like a family then? Yeah, yeah. Well, here is theirs. Like our lodge. I don't know if we have 15 members now. So you think they joined the lodge because your sister-in-law was there, or brother-in-law was– There was that kind of– No, I think that they– I don't know. That's too far back for me to answer that question intelligently, because I don't know. Yeah, they– Yeah, yeah. And like Lotta Eklund, she might be related to somebody in the other lodge, you know. And it got confusing. It did for me anyway. I can't keep them straight. But they had the same philosophy, and they joined the lodge to come together for different doings. Oh, yeah. Like I said, they were members long before I came on the scene, so to speak. So when you came into Rockford, then the Depression was more or less over, then there was the tail end of it. It was the tail end of it. You didn't see the suffering they had without– No, Carl came more into that, and he said that he could tell you the cost of half of an egg because, you know, work wasn't so good. But– And a lot of the guys, I guess they would go someplace and be together or cook together or something. Karen Anderson can tell you that face of that better than I can. Yes. As far as where I came from, as far as food was concerned, there wasn't much money, but food was plentiful because we had a garden and we had fruit and we had anything we wanted on that little acre. So you were self-sufficient, in other words. Yeah, we had no problem as far as– I always wonder about that, you know, like your family, your 10, 11 children, how could they get food on the table? You wonder– See, I didn't live there, so I had that– I don't know. What you think about it is really amazing how they could keep– Yeah, where I was from– They had a garden also in Pennsylvania. Yeah. And they would have canned goods, I suppose. But what I'm talking about is Iowa, where I grew up. We had a big garden and did a lot of canning. We had fruit. We had apricots, currants, grapes, apples, peaches, and it all be canned and then made in pickles and all kinds of things, you know. So it was only the money that was really the short thing there. It was hard to be an Iowan. Yeah. Because like the coal mining, it wasn't that big as it was in Pennsylvania there. So my uncle had to go out of town and work. He went to Des Moines too then? No, it was a smaller town outside of Des Moines that he would go. There was a mine somewhere up there. But like I said, very few of them stayed in Dallas because there wasn't any industry. The only thing would be farming around there. So what did you write now to your mother when you had met Collier? I didn't write anything. You didn't say anything? Yeah, but they were interested. I told you I did not live with my mother. I lived with my aunt. Did you keep in contact with them? Yes, but– There was more with Iowa side then. Oh, yes. That was my mother. What did you tell her then when you came back? Well, I suppose I wrote and told them that we had a Swede or something. Yeah. So there was no objection. At that time, nationalities– No. The biggest objection, and I don't know if you want to record that or not, would have been from the Methodist or the Christian if you were to marry or be into the Catholic Church. So there was really– It was taboo. Taboo, taboo. The Swedes had the same thing. You know, they– Yeah, but it isn't now. They disappeared. Yeah. It's probably a good thing, though. I think it's a good thing because I don't think that the religion should enter into it. And I don't think that they have to be so strict as to which side they are raised, which side of the church. So when you were called and got married, you didn't join any church then? No. He didn't belong to any here in Rockford either? No. The Swedes aren't that much for church. Well, what they say, everybody is religious, they say. But it's quite a few– I think there's more now that go to church than then. But Carl, I don't know if he ever belonged to a church. His name is in the Varenameau– –encountered with the– Well, the girl two doors away, I suppose you would say, that they went to church with. Which church was that? It's a church up on Broadway, Methodist, I think it's called. Well, anyway, they went and were confirmed in– They do not attend church either. But they were confirmed? Yes, they were confirmed. Were you confirmed out in Iowa? I wouldn't have to be because it was the Methodists. Methodists don't get confirmed. Only the Lutherans and so on. Yeah, but this– Your twins now, they were confirmed. I think I'm wrong. It was a Lutheran church up here. They went to? Broadway Lutheran, I don't know the name of it. But as far as religion, it's not too much in our family. So when they married, did they have– They had weddings in church. Mm-hmm. Yeah. So– How did you– In the home now, when the girls were growing up, did you use any Swedish at all or only English? Only English. Yeah. Like I said, Carl said, I am an American. I'm going to speak my English. So he did. He didn't talk Swedish, only if there was a Swedish person that came or something like that. So when you came to the large meetings, you had to listen to Swedish. Yes, I had to listen. Did you understand it after a while? No, not that much. I understand maybe a little, but not that much, no. And it's not necessary. If you go to Sweden, you don't have to know Swedish. But you understand what they talk about in general? Not that much. I wouldn't say no. But you have been to Sweden, though, to Carl's– I've been there, I think, about five times. You haven't met his parents, though? Not his parents, no. But his sisters and brothers, yeah. They live in Värnamo? Yeah. There's one lives in Värnamo, one in Trollhättan, and one in Helsingborg. And I have traveled quite a bit in Sweden. Because I have friends that live on the west coast in Bohusländ. And then I have some in Horn, Sweden. In Östergötland? I guess– I think so, yeah. And they live on a farm. We had three girls that came– You know there's a camp in Geneva. And one year, these Swedish young people came over, and they wanted to stay in a home. And so Carl took a week off, special, so he could have one of the Swedish and take them around. And so we drove up, and he said, you wanted to have one of the young people. And they said, well, we don't have any left. And then he says, oh, yes, we do. We have one. And so, okay, we take her. The trouble is, she has her twin with her. We'll take her. The trouble is, they have their sister along. So we had three girls. And that was before this was built. And they fit in just like our own children. You would think that. They had lived here all their life. So we took them down to Dubuque and up into Wisconsin and back down again. We were gone about three days. Did they speak English? They spoke English. Very nice girls. They didn't belong to good Templars either, but it was a good Templar group, I believe, that came. So that's why I go and visit with them. They're my Swedish girls. So there's newly found friends, then, you have. Yes, they're– Of course, Carl was living at that time, so– The first time you went to Sweden, that was together with Carl then. Yeah. 1967. 1967. That was the first time you've been back then since– And then we went in 74. And then I think it was in 78 after Carl passed away, and then I went with my brother and sister-in-law. We went to Germany. And then I was in Sweden at that time, too. I think it was about five times. Six, I've been over there. So have you been able to trace your family background? Not too well. We've tried, but we can't find anybody. All the aunts are gone, and we haven't anybody that's really tried to pursue it, I don't think. So then it was easier on your husband's side to find– Yeah. –the roots of the– Yeah, on my father's side it was easy, too, because I have all of their children and ages when they were born. My father's brothers and sisters, I have that. In fact, that's my family in there. See the round pictures? That's my father and mother in there. And that's the sixth with me as the baby in there. Did you go to the place in Germany where they came from? No, I didn't. You don't know exactly where they came from? No. No, I don't know. No, my brother had a daughter that lived in– was over there. Her husband was in the service in Berlin, so we went there. And we didn't travel, you know, around the country. So then you go on different– went to different conventions, to the IUDT, or– Yeah, I've been in Bergen. Norway. And we've been in Finland. And then we went– They gave us a visa and we went over to Leningrad. And I guess that's about it. That was interesting. Karl and I went to the one in Finland. So he was a delegate then from the Illinois– No, they weren't delegates. We just went most of the time. The one in Bergen, of course, he wasn't living then. I was alone. But we had a– We went for about a week out on the fjords in the bus. That was really something. Really interesting. I still think now, how did I dare do it, you know, when they drive the bus along and it's hanging over the edge of the road? Deep ditches. Deep ditches is right. We went up one mountain, and some of the people on the bus wouldn't go. And you had to pay– They had, like, a toll. And I had a roommate. She lives in Washington, the state of Washington. And she said, Are you going? I said, Yeah, I'll go if you go. So we went up. We came down, and we looked at each other, and we said, Would you have gone if I hadn't? No. And the other one said, No. She said, Well, it took two of us to make one courage. It was really– Those bus drivers are fantastic. Have you ever been on– It looks almost impossible to– Have you been on some of– Well, I haven't been on the tours, but I've been driving with a car. My own car. You know, and then you come– You sit higher in the bus, so it probably looks– Yeah, oh, well, yeah, but you go, you know, and you come down, and you say, Oh, we're down now. And then they keep going, and pretty soon you say, We're down now, because it's a flat plateau, and then you keep going down and down and down. But this one time, they– You know, they go through so many tunnels, but one time we were on the inner side in the bus, and I said, I'm sure that that car's wheels were just like this on the other side. I wonder how many people they lose. You never hear that? No, you don't hear it. But it's a memorable travel, I bet. It was very nice. We went up– They were skiing, of course, way up on the mountain, but we couldn't see them because it was so hazy up there. And then the food, oh, my gosh, it was fantastic. What did you introduce now in your family when you married Karl Lundh here? What did I introduce? What kind of food? I mean, different– Oh, we didn't use so much Swedish. No. Pot roast and– No, once in a while. Did you learn to bake anything of Swedish– I could bake it if I wanted to, yeah, but never could you master what those Swedish ladies could do. They were experts. Really experts. They didn't have any recipes to give out either, I suppose. There's a good Templar cookbook with it. Have you heard of that? Oh, yes, sure. So you have the recipes if you want to do it. But sometimes it's hard to get the recipes right. I mean, you gotta be a– a talent behind it to get it right. But most of those– They were pretty good. It's too bad you didn't know some of these older people because they really were fantastic. Baking and– I have told you before, they were really nice people. Do you think the Swedes went over too far with the food? Everything seems to be food, eating and– Yes, I think– What's a little bit too much, you think? I think– You mean when they serve coffee at Sewing Circle and so on? Yeah, they have so many cookies and– Yes, yes, yes. But this one lady, nobody wanted to miss going to her house because she had such wonderful food. It was really– She could really bake. But you'll find most of those, like I said, could really bake. They were good. And somebody like me to come in and try to mimic them, it just wouldn't work. They were good. But you had to help out too, though, to– Oh, yeah, I would take my– I would take– Yeah, we would have lodge here and so on, but– But there were so many of them at that time, so they didn't need any more help actually to bake and cook and so on. No. Did they bring it in then from their home, or did you have– At Riga you had a kitchen. At the lodge down there. Yeah, down there, yeah. There was a kitchen. There'd be potluck. Most is potluck. But sometimes you had dinners for the public, though, or didn't you have that? Where you tried to raise money for certain things. I don't remember too much of that. Maybe that was before. Maybe it was Riga that had that. They had picnics in the summer. Yeah, the picnics in the summer. They had– Used to have real nice programs, but now we have come– Now, like, we have opening day and so on. At Bellwood. Yeah, and then we would sell tickets and cook the food. Well, then it got so– A couple of years, they hired a lady to come and cook it. And now we have it just– You come and you bring a dish. And then they have a grill that they set up, and if you want to fry hamburgers or whatever, then you do that. But it is nothing for money-making anymore. So this is a smaller scale than– Oh, much smaller scale. You don't need the money now when you are– Stop growing, in other words. You can live on the fat. Vega has that. Because they sold the building. But we don't have that much money, but we keep our heads above water. So you have, like, a funeral benefit or– We don't have anything like that. They used to, but they don't. I don't know if Vega does or not. They dropped off the– I don't think Vega does either. Oh, they could be there. I know. We never had really– I think it was more sick benefit than funeral. Were there any gymnastics program like that when you came here in the 30s? Not when I came. It was all gone. Well, that I don't know. You'd have to ask somebody that knows. Well, I mean, if you didn't see it, it was probably gone then by that time. The Depression probably took care of it. No. Not that I know of. A lot of things disappeared during the Depression. Yeah. But I don't know. The Swedes seemed to come out pretty good on top of it. None of them, I don't think, were hurting as far as money is concerned. Like your husband, he was without a job during the Depression, or didn't he? I think he worked a little, but I don't know how much. He never talked too much about it. So this cafe now you worked at, that was the Berslers' cafe. Yeah. On 7th Street? Yeah. It was on 7th Street. Yeah, it was one of the most popular in town. Was it Svea? No, it was Eklund's Cafe. Eklund's Cafe, yeah. But you should have seen the counter. They had two counters, one with a walk-through here, one here and one here. And on Sundays, they would set up a smorgasbord. And they had something built so that it made it bigger. And then they had all kinds of food on there. And I don't remember, I think it was 75 cents. It was so cheap. But it wasn't, of course, in those days. They could serve themselves then? Yeah, there was smorgasbord. Yeah, but they ate like... Yeah, I know, but......worse at that time. I mean, all workers and everything. How did they make a profit on it? Well, they did. There was so many of them, I suppose. Yeah, but... It was really a beautiful thing. And it was every Sunday, a smorgasbord? Every Sunday. And then during the week, they had fixed lunches for these guys. And each one would have a certain thing that they had in their lunch. You know, so they had paper bags, and paper bags for the bachelors. Was it they could order? Well, they probably had ordered ahead of time, or they had a standard one. But say they wanted, needed something different, then they would have a different one. How was that wrapped at that time? It was in a paper bag. A brown bag? Mm-hmm, yeah. But inside the brown bag was a kind of special paper? I suppose it was. I don't remember now. It's been so long ago. Yeah. But it was a lot of work to keep all those bags... Yeah. They received them and registered them. You see, there was two brothers and then their wives that had that restaurant. And the wives worked in the kitchen, and the men were out there. But the wives were, as usual, they were very good cooks. And they had a bakery up in the front of the building. It was a narrow, long building. Well, they had their own bakery then. They had a bakery, too. Yeah, they sold bread and blood bread, like that. There was a lot of new dishes you had to be familiar with. Yes. When you came to the Swedes. Oh, yes. Sütter and... That I don't care for. Brunnerbrunner and... You never had... Fleschbarnkake. We never had anything like that. No. Did it seem kind of heavy for you? No. I didn't care for fleschbarnkake, but I liked the cabbage rolls and things like that. But the fleschbarnkake and the herring, I never cared for. How about the købkake? That I liked. I don't think they served quite so much of that, though. At that time? No. There's more now lately, maybe. More now, yeah. You can only eat one or two of those depending on the size. They get pretty heavy. But at that time, everybody was working hard, so I suppose they had a tremendous appetite. Yeah. But we used to have families that would come in, too. With kids? Yeah, mm-hmm. Yeah. They had tables on the floor. And there'd be families that would come. It wasn't all bachelors. But could they afford a family of two or three kids to go out for dinner like they do now, for instance? Well, I don't think they went out that much. Probably maybe Sunday or something, yeah. Or maybe once in an evening, but they're not like they do now. No. Because at that time, I suppose every cent or penny was worth... Yeah....a dollar. Yeah. They had to be frugal and safe. Yeah, yeah, that's true. But you see, 7th Street, not like it is now. You see any nationality down there. And you never saw, let us say, a black or oriental. It was all Swedish. All Swedish. Most all Swedish. And no Irish or Italians either? Not too many. Not that I remember. Maybe me. So they didn't feel comfortable down there? Well, you see, on South Main, that was the Italian over there. So they probably stayed over there more. So they had their little sections. Did you go out dancing before you met Carl? No, not too much, no. If I did go dancing, it would be at Good Templars. No. You never went to the West Side for dancing? No, there was a little park over there, but that disappeared about the time I came. That was no longer over there. So when you got married, then you rented an apartment. Mm-hmm. And you started to save up for a house, I suppose. No, we went into a little apartment, and then we moved into a bigger apartment. And then when the girls– There was a bachelor lady and a bachelor gentleman, brother and sister, that lived upstairs. It was a four-family. It was that close to downtown? It was on Kishwaukee, Fourth Avenue. And so then we moved in there. And then when the children were born, they didn't like children too well. So then Carl had– I don't know if you know what Quincy is. It's pus on the tonsils. And he was ill, and we had trouble with one of the girls. And so we were unhappy there, and they didn't care for us to be there. So then we started looking for a house, but we actually didn't do it ourselves. We had a Swedish couple that did it because Carl was ill. We had the two little girls, and one, we were having trouble. She was ill, and this couple were going around and looking for a house. And this one day they came and said, We found a house for you. Was it after the war or during the war? It was in 19– Probably 1940. Forty? Yeah. 1940, yeah. And you were not working then because– No, it was later in 1940. The girls were born in 1941. So say 1941, yeah. No, because I had the girls. I would go out and help Eklunds at a party or something like that, but no, I didn't have a steady job. And anyway, we came out and looked at the house, and we told them we would take it. And of course, the rent– We managed pretty well on what it cost. Was it hard to get the housing at that time? Houses were– Right at that time– I'm going to say they– There wasn't too many, but this house, the people reduced the price on it. Why, I don't know. They did that. And it was hard to find a house that was suitable. We had one up on Prospect, but that one had a dirt basement. I don't know if you've ever seen them. They're kind of black, black. Black walls, you know, they were dirt. And then when they found this one, of course, this was well-kept. Now, this room wasn't on there. I built this room in 1980. This was the house you got in Drenhe? This is the house. Oh, yeah. And it was new then at that time? Well, I imagine it was maybe two years or three, something like that, I would imagine. But there was another couple that lived here, and they sold it to us. Well, anyway, we said we would have it, and the next day the real estate called and said that– It's a good thing we said we'd take it because another couple had called and said they wanted it. So we were very fortunate. But, yeah, there was a big slab here that came out. This door was the outside door. And it's been a comfortable and well-built house. Yeah. There were not too many houses built during that time? We were the last one on the block here. And then the field back there was empty behind us. See the fir trees? Behind there was empty. And this was a farm up here. You could hear the cows mooing up behind here. It was a farm. Yeah. So this was the outskirts of Rockport? Yeah. Oh, definitely. Yeah, people would come out here, and they'd come to the end of a street, and their car would go down in the mud, and they couldn't find their way out. If somebody was looking for a house, they'd go to Rolling Green and look. Yeah. Well, this is the Rolling Green? This is Rolling Green. Mm-hmm. Yeah. So at that time, there was an oil furnace, then there was a gas furnace, or...? Coal. Coal. It was still coal? Mm-hmm. This one was coal. And wall-to-wall carpet? No. No? Hard floors. I see. So they came in later, and wall-to-wall carpet. Yeah, yes. Mm-hmm. Oh, yes. Most of these are– There's very nice floors underneath here, but carpeting's much easier to take care of than the hard floors. But they actually came a little bit later on? Yeah. Mm-hmm. Wall-to-wall, yeah. Mm-hmm. Yeah, it was mostly 9x12 rugs, and then you had about that much room between the wall and the rug. Mm-hmm. So your husband, now, he continued working, then, for the same company for a while? Yeah, he worked all the time we were married. And then he retired– Well, he had been retired about a year, and then he passed away in 1976. I see. So he didn't enjoy his retirement, then? Mm-mm. He had a massive heart attack. I see. No. No, you know, some people can live 10, 20 years after they retire, and it just wasn't that way. No? So that's one of those things you never know. No, you never know. You make your plans, but you never know. And he was active in RUGT all the way? He was very active, yes. He was still the secretary? Yeah, he was the secretary for, oh, golly, ever since we were married, and then until he passed away, of course. And he– You know, they used to, when somebody passed away, they would write something about the person. Obituary? Yeah, but it was more than obituary that he would write. Like a memoriam or something like that? Yes, and he really did a beautiful job. So he was a well-known person, though, in the Army? Yeah, in the Lodge, he was. He was well-liked. And he is buried at the– It's out to Arlington. Arlington, mm-hmm. Do they all have plots there, the members, or– A lot of them. I don't know if there's any– There might be a few that don't, yeah. Well, most of them have. Yeah. We happened to get ours from a man that had bought– It was a bachelor, and he had six graves. And finally, he said he would sell to us. Well, then you interviewed Karen and Eddie Anderson up here. Her parents had a grave site someplace else, and they didn't want to be there. So we sold them the other side of the graves. So they're out there. Oh. So there's a special part of the cemetery. It's that one corner. Have you been out there? No, I haven't, but I– Oh, you should go out. Of course, Lila is out there. And her parents. Yes. I don't know if there's anybody else you know that are out there. But then they go down to the Scandinavian on Memorial Day. They go down to there, the Vega. Well, the Vega also have a grave plot– They have members that, from many years back– Some of the founding fathers. I suppose so. And then they take geraniums and put on those graves. And Margaret Eck knows where all of them are. So she's the leader of the group. And they put those on every grave. And some of them are really old. But they're still observed. Yeah, they do. Vega does. Dedicated days for a day. Is it during the Memorial Day? Well, yeah, during that time. And then after that, they go up to Alpine Park and have eggs and bacon and potatoes and the group that has been going– Real Swedish breakfast. Or is it American? No, it's American. Eggs and bacon. And home fries. Yeah. Was there what the Swedes ate when they came in the restaurant? What was the standing food they were– Oatmeal. They liked to have– Quite a few had oatmeal. Oh, yeah. I think most of them had some– But bacon and egg and home fries was the standing– Yeah, I suppose so. But I can remember a lot of them. But Flesbank, you passed that one up? I passed that up. But they wouldn't serve that for breakfast. That was a meal, just like they have here. They have special nights when they have different groups. Now, there's a restaurant down at 20th and Broadway. Yeah, Stockholm Inn. They do that. I think they serve– Well, they serve Kruppkakor and some of those things down there. And Swedish pancakes. I don't care for Swedish pancakes. I suppose this is how you were brought up. Yeah. Is it different? I like the little ones. Flespank– Fles– No, wait a minute. Batata– No, the small pancakes. Oh, the dollar size? Yeah. Those were– I like better. They were made a little bit different. So that's all kind of different opinions. That's for sure. But food, I suppose, is a very important ingredient. So to like, I mean, you have to– Especially if you have a family. Like in Italian or in the Swedes, somebody has to give their– Because Italian food, I suppose, is more spicy. Yes, and– And Hungarian and a lot of garlic. I used to work with a girl that were Italian. And they always have, before their meal, they'd have a little bit of spaghetti and a little bit of something else. And that was standard. Before the meal? Before the meal. They'd eat that and then the meal. Yeah, they always had that on the table. I don't know whether she does it now, but I know the older people did. Do you remember when you served on the Tecla's Café, if you served coffee before the meal? No, they served it with it. With the meal? Pretty much so, yeah. Yeah. I was going to make coffee, but I can't. Oh, you can't, no. But now a time, you know, when you come into a restaurant, there's always– they give you coffee right away. But at that time, it was always with the meal. Yeah, yeah, more so. They waited then for the meal and the coffee. Oh, yeah, they never served it ahead of time. How about in the afternoon at the café? Did they come in and have a cup of coffee or– On most–