 So you went back there in 1940 and you had your dad and your mother with you? And my brother. And your brother. And were they married down here, your brother and all? Yeah, oh yes. My sister lives up in Wisconsin about 155 miles north of here. He's married to Harry Sand. No they weren't married here, but he's from Sweden. He was in the butter and egg business, that's the one I worked with. And then later on he had his own pattern shop out here. And then they retired, they live up in Wisconsin. And he's from Småland. So you went back in 1940 and then you saw the nature you had been missing for so many years. But what did you see, something else, the hardship of the people that lived up there at the time? Well, I don't know if you'd call it hardship, they had a beautiful log house, real nice. How is the climate now? Oh, beautiful weather up there. In the wintertime it's cold. It's cold. But when we were there, I don't know, it gets warm up there too, it can get hot. You can get 100 degrees up there. But that's humid. No, no, dry. Dry climate. And a lot of fruit orchards up that way and the fishing is tremendous up there. No, that area, I enjoy that country up there. So you had an aunt there? I had two aunts living up there. Sisters too? Yeah, maybe my mother's oldest sister and her youngest sister lived up there. And they all came from Sweden at the same time. So evidently they couldn't get any work at all in Sweden. I don't know what, it must have been on account of the labor troubles they had over there or something, because at that time Sweden was pretty rough. The working man was a working man and that was it. So when you visited those aunts in 1940, were they with us then, their husbands, were they dead? No, no, they were there. Oh yes. The whole family was there. So we had, they had three kids and the other one, the oldest sister, that was her second marriage. I don't know how many kids she had, she must have had about eight or nine kids I guess. But they had three, five, and it was my brother and I, seven kids, and sisters and brothers were all together, because my uncle was, well my mother and her uncle, her brother from Trail and her two sisters up there. So it was quite a gathering. You were happy to see each other again? Oh yeah. I haven't seen, I saw the one girl in 56 when I was up there, of course her folks were dead then. But that's the only one I saw. And the one boy that I met, one cousin, he got killed in the war as a flyer. And now they're all scattered? Oh yeah, they're scattered all over. I wouldn't even know, I don't even have their addresses or anything. You had no contact with them? No. Oh, I have contact with the ones I lived with in Trail. I keep track of them. Of course we were close, we lived right next door to each other and then the other one lived up the hill a little ways from us. So I do keep in contact with those people. One of them lives in Karameos, the other lives in Burnaby, one in Vancouver. So the survival situation for them now, during the Depression for instance, did they have any hardship? Up there? No. They never missed an hour's work. They were still working? Oh sure, that plant there never shut down since it opened up. They worked, there was no Depression up there at all. They run 24 hours a day, steady. Every day of the year, for every year since 18, I think around 1890, 1993, somewhere in there. That plant's been going full blast. And now they make heavy water up there, they made heavy water up there during the war. I was up there, I was just 41, they were still at war then, you know, in 40. And they were making heavy water up on the hill there. It was off limits to everybody, you couldn't even get close to the place. And then they also make fertilizer up there. Because I was just a kid, I can remember my folks talking about back in 1922, 23, all the mountains around there and all the green stuff was being killed by the smoke from the hill, you know, from the sulfuric acid from the smoke. So it got to be an international incident with the fruit growers down in the Wenatchee Valley in Washington because the smoke was going that way. So they got together and built two huge stacks and they filtered the smoke, took all the impurities out of it, made fertilizer out of all that stuff. So you see, it can be done if they want to. Did they clean it up? Back in the early 20s, 23, 24. So they were able to check that out? Oh sure, you go up there now, it's just as green as, you wouldn't even know there was a smelter there. And that was back in the 20s? Yeah. I can remember my dad saying it was going to cost two million dollars, well you know, two million dollars back in the early 20s, that was unheard of. To buy a whole country, but they did it. They did it. You know, and then I, when I hear about this acid rain out east, you know, and I just talk about it, talk about it, talk about it, and I don't do anything about it. So they could go out there and take a lesson on that. They make, it's one of the biggest fertilizer plants in the world, byproduct. So this is the same operation as in Ruka, Norway? Yeah. They also have saltpeter plants in order to get heavy water. That was the one the Russians, the Germans were after. So your dad, now he never, whenever thinking about going back then, I mean, he saw the plant was rotting, and he had a hardship here in Rockford. He wanted to go back. He didn't have the means to go back in the first place. That was number one. That was number one, didn't have the means to do it. He couldn't do that. And then, you know, he finally got a job when things started picking up there, he got a job at the old Roper plant out here, Roper Stove plant. Then he went over to Mechanics Universal and ended up at Rockford Clutch or Rockford, yeah, Borg Warner. The plant moved out there to, on Harris Nano. So you had a nice reunion then with the remnants of the people out there? Oh yeah. Yeah. I'm going up to see some of them next month again. So you go out there for vacation? Well, we're going out to a wedding. You fly out then? Well, I'm going to fly to Spokane and rent a car and then drive over to Seattle and then the other side of Seattle on the Olympic Peninsula is where we're going. Then we're going up to Vancouver and see some of the relatives. So you're all stomping around? Well, I won't be able to get up to my hometown this time. No? No. It's too far away then? Well, yeah, I'm on a little bit of a tight schedule too. I've got my brother-in-law and his wife, Bert's going to go with us. So we're going to go up and see some country that he's never been in. I've been up there before, but go over to Vancouver Island, he's never been out there. How are the people now compared to Rockford? Were they more relaxed up in British Columbia compared to Illinois and Chicago, more rushy and hectic? Oh, I would think so, yes. I would think so. There are more nation lovers up there because of the rivers and the... I don't think they have the fierce competition either, you know, the different factories and that. You work in a company town like that, more or less everybody knows what everybody else is doing. I don't know if that's good or bad, but it's just a different way of life, I think. So the people you came back to in 1940, it was the first time after you'd been here in Rockford. Yeah. How were they... I told you now, were they open and interested to find out what was there? Oh, sure. Oh, yes. How did you do with the Depression? Could they believe you then when you told them the stories about the Depression? No, I don't think so. It didn't quite sink in, really. It's hard to explain for them, though. Well, even people in this country. I'll even go to like Marion's hometown, Marquette, you know. They really didn't have anything like that because there's no industry up there to speak of and they have the big state prison up there and the ore docks, you know, and stuff like that. They were running, but it didn't... And her dad was never in... her dad ran a... well, your dad ran a grocery store up there, didn't he? For a while? For a long time. He had a gas station. Then he had the first Sinclair gas station up there. He had that when I met her. And her brother worked at the prison and one of them worked in the post office, see? Safe jobs. Yeah. That's different, you know. Some guy working at Tool and Dash happened to come to work one morning and, oh, we're not running anymore, you know. What are you going to do? You can't turn around because the guy next door wasn't working either. But then the soccer playing was a good relief, I mean, in your case. Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. To be occupied with something and... Oh, yeah. And friends to be together with. Yeah, we were all in the same boat. Oh. But the one that didn't enjoy sport, for instance, they... many of them took to the bottle. Yeah, well, in those days you couldn't get anything in Rockford, you know. Prohibition didn't go out until 19... 33, 34? 30... was it 33? I was going to say 36. Maybe it was after Roosevelt got in, I guess. Then they brought in beer after that. Yeah, but they were homebrewers. Oh, yeah. They were a lot of blind pigs and, you know, bootleg joints. So they didn't stop them from getting it? No. If they wanted it bad enough, why, they could get it, I guess. But the athletic activities was good over here. Oh, yes. Oh, yeah. And even the girls had gymnastic teams. Yeah. With the temperance organizations. Yeah. So you were talking about police organizations when you came here, not the tacit police or general police? No, the chapter in the conversation was the corporal general. Okay.