 Yeah, this is cassette two, it's a continuation with Frank Olson, Rockford, Illinois. And you were born in Minneapolis? Right, 1925. 1925. And your parents take you to Sweden? Right, right. Dad came over here and I think he came a couple years before my mother. And when he came over he went down and was working in West Virginia doing railroad work. He did, well, the lumberjack work to do the clearing for the railroads in West Virginia. And from there he went back up to Minnesota and was working as a lumberjack up there for a while too. How come you got this job down in West Virginia? That was off the path for the Swedes. Well I guess, I really never did, he never did say how he ended up there. The only thing I can figure out is that he must have had some friends there. In fact, I think he did have friends that were working there. And he went to them first. Some of the Swedes you mean? Yeah, Eric Lind was a friend of his and he was also a lumberjack. In fact, he was a lumberjack all his life. And he's the one that I think got him the job down there. And where was that located? In the city? Do you remember the name of it? No, I don't. Actually, if they were working for the railroad crew it was probably a work camp and just went from one to another then. And from there they went up to Minnesota and was doing some lumberjacking up there too. But then Dad had been doing some bricklaying in Sweden so when he got a chance to get a job doing that up in Minneapolis, that's when he started doing it and got out of the woods. And his name was? Carl. Carl Olsson? Yeah. And from where in Sweden? Dalarna, Rättvik. Rättvik? Yeah. I see. And Mom was from Rättvik too as far as that goes. But they were married here in Minneapolis? Yeah. Yeah. Oh. Yeah. She, when Ma came here she went to work over in Iowa. What city was it now? Fort Dodge? No. Uh-uh. No. I can't even remember now. But she was working there as a housemaid. And from there I guess she went up to Minneapolis too, otherwise they never would have met. But actually they knew each other from Sweden so it was not a first meeting between the two. Maybe they made her move up there. She knew that he... I don't know. The thing could be that there had been correspondence from the families and somehow or other they said you should go and see Carl or... Vitt Karl is what he was called then. Oh, I see. They have names like that. Yeah. He was from Vittgården. Yeah. And from there after I was born, well my sister was born there too, from there they went to Milwaukee where Dad found work. I guess it ran short up in Minneapolis and they found work down in Milwaukee so they went down there. And from there they ended up in Rockford. So they did a little traveling around getting... Why do you think they came down to Rockford now? Were you a little boy then? You were born in Minneapolis and... Yes. My sister was born there. But my brother was born here. You came down in the... During the Depression then or... Well, I'd say they came here just before the Depression because as I remember it, they moved here in 1929. So that would have been just about when all the tough luck was starting. So you vaguely remember then when they moved? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. We lived in a house on 6th Street right next to the railroad tracks and I well remember doing that. The lady was Mrs. Lindahl, Jenny Lindahl, and she was what they called the grass widow then. So the folks felt sorry for her and she was very kind to us too. She lived in the first floor, we had the second floor and I don't know how much rent they paid or if they ever did pay rent because times were tough then and I think she was glad to have somebody that helped her keep up the property when she had no man around. And Dad was always a hard worker so I'm sure he helped her with all that stuff. And he was a bricklayer then? Yeah. Yeah. He was that... So what happened then during the Depression? There was a... Well, we had a little tough luck then too because my dad had a stroke just at the very beginning of the Depression. He was not that old at all? He was 37 when he had it. 37. Yeah. And... Don't worry about that, Cal. For a long time, for two years there, he couldn't work because of that. So he was basically the housewife and my mother went down when they were... they started building the new newspaper building, the news tower. She went down there and asked for a job as a janitoress. At the time, they were pouring the footings on the place and she waited all year while they built the building but when it got done, she did get a job there and she worked as a janitoress there at the news tower for many, many years. Even after dad was better and was working, she was still working there. Well, let's do something. But he recovered then from it? Yeah. Yeah. He did. Yeah. It was for two years that he never did a thing but even if he had been healthy, I suppose he wouldn't have been doing much anyhow because there just wasn't any work. And she worked, like I said, she worked at the news tower long afterwards and she worked nights, dad worked days. So it ended up a lot of times that... You were alone? Yeah. Not alone. I wouldn't say alone. I mean, that was... Somebody was sleeping, I mean. Yeah. It was a single, single parent family there for a long time but alternating parents. How many kids were you then? Three. Three? Yeah. Yeah. Len, my brother, he was born in 32 so that was... You were the oldest then? Yeah. Actually, dad ended up doing a lot of babysitting then too. Was he interested in politics? Like your wife's father? No. No. Not really, no. No? No. Not... He was a strong democrat but really not interested in politics. Not interested in religion. Interested in a good time. God, could he dance. If he went to a dance, there wasn't a one that he sat out and anybody that was willing to dance with him sure got a... They got a workout, I'll tell you that. She didn't spend much of her time on both feet. It was usually on one foot and the other one's flying. Yeah, but now after having this stroke, how could he... He recovered completely. You would think he would be careful though to... No. Well, he had to give up the smoking and the snooze for a while. In fact, he quit snuff and the smoking altogether. But he was still dancing. Oh yeah. Yeah. There wasn't anything wrong with him after he recovered. He spent every weekend that we could at... Well, you know, the old Swedish lodges had the parties at the parks. And if it wasn't at Vasa Park, it was at Camp Hillcrest or Lyron Park or some place or other every weekend. How about you now? Were you also interested in dancing and... Well, I used to be a member of the lodges dance team and we went out to Philadelphia, as I remember, and danced when... 1938? Yeah. Yeah. When the prince was here, we was out for the big doing Southeast. So you danced folk dances then? Yeah. Yeah. And my sister did too. My brother was too young, so he never did get involved in it, but we sure did our share of it. And oh, we'd dance here and in Chicago sometimes and travel a little bit all over in the area. Did you talk Swedish now in your home, your parents and... Oh yes. Yes. I... Was it mostly Swedish spoken? Yeah. Yeah. Until I started school, basically. When I started school, that's when I had to start speaking English and start learning it. But until then, it was... All Swedish? Yeah. Except with the kids that we played with, and a lot of them were Swedes too, so that didn't make any difference there either. How about any school when you were... Other kids now, like Polacks and Latvians and Estonians, did you have any fights with them? No. No. Not really. No. We got along fine. In high school, we even had the cheers for the football team and basketball team in Swedish. In Swedish? Yeah. I remember, rock and rock and slowed any balken. And I forget the rest of it, how it went, but everybody in the school knew that one. You mean, including the Polacks and Latvians? Oh yeah. Yeah. Yeah. They learned it by rote or whatever. So when they started hollering for rock and rock, and then everybody gave it to us. I guess we had more than one that was in Swedish, but I can't... That's the one I remember the best. Oh, so there was a... For a long time there, the school even had a course in Swedish. But that started, I think, carried on more after the kids in my generation finished with school, because that would be the ones that were even later that had a smattering of Swedish, and they were trying to pick up a little more, so they did carry a class in Swedish in high school. That was only at East High. They never had it at West High or any of the other ones. So when you played West High now, for instance, what's the rivalry then between the... Oh yeah. Oh, I hope to tell you. I remember the first time we played West High, the first year they were ever two separate schools and played. They had big pep rallies before the game, and the night before, everybody in the schools had parade, and we went downtown. And there never was really any fighting between the two, but they started snake dances, and it was crazy. They started bonfires right at the main intersection in town. Everybody ran and got paper boxes and started a big fire right in the middle of the intersection. You mean on the East Side or... Well, it was just across the river. State and Main was the center of town, basically. We started a big fire there, and while the firemen came to pull that, put that one out, half a block down, they started another one. And while they were doing that one, another half a block down at the next intersection, they started a fire, and it just went, I think, about four blocks downtown. They just ran from one to another, putting the fire out. And then the kids started snake dancing, and they'd march right in, one door on the theater, march all around the theater and go out. And they went to the biggest hotel in town, which was the Faust Hotel. Now it's the Tabala Towers. And they marched in that place, all around, in the lobby, up on the other floors, and back down. It was, it was really no damage created, but they just had an awful good letting go of steam. Did you do that, too? What? The one, the snake dances? Yes. I was sheltered. I wasn't allowed. Did we? You mean the East Side kids did this? I thought there would be youngsters from the West Side that did it. Oh, no, both. Both. Yeah, sure. We just met downtown. I mean, everybody was letting off steam. There wasn't really any, a lot of cheering. There wasn't any fighting, but a lot of noise. That was about it. And the guys from the East Side would march, snake dance around the West Side, and the West Siders, they came over and went through Faust Hotel and the areas on the East Side. And afterwards, everybody would pile in their vehicles. Alan Engelmeyer had the truck, I remember that, and he had the whole back of the truck full of kids that he was hauling around. Then the next night, we were supposed to play the game, but— You were all wore out. No, the authorities were so upset about what had happened that they threatened to cancel the game. But I guess they had a little, a few second thoughts about that and decided that it would be more dangerous to cancel the game than it would be to have it. So we did play it, and as I remember, East won that first game by about two points. Do you find this is a situation that comes up a lot when a city is divided, like Rockford is, one section where the Italians are? Yes, it probably— Are there other cities like that that you can recall? Yeah, well, 1,700, 1,500 years ago, they probably would have happened. Even a railroad track was divided on. I suppose it would, wouldn't it? Yeah, yeah. Here we— Here is the Monash was having, I mean the— The river. As a kid when we grew up, you only thought, by gosh, you stayed on the East Side and that was it. And— There was no question about it. No, there was no question about it. And as a kid when you grew up, you more or less thought that the East Side was the best side of town, and it was all very poor on over there. And it wasn't until after we married and had our own cars that we began to see, gee, they look pretty nice over on the West Side, too, you know. But it's a shame a city is divided that way for so long. It really is. But not after they built a new library and the City Hall is on the West Side. Yeah. Why did they do that? Or you would think the center was on this side. No, the City Hall is not on the West Side. The City Hall is on this side. On this side, yeah. Yeah, yeah, yeah. But the new library, though, is on the West Side. Library, the courthouse, the Metro Center, they're all— On the West Side. Yeah, yeah. Why did they have to know? You would think the East Side would have won over. Well, they're trying to save the West Side, really. So they have created what they call the Enterprise Zones, which give you tax breaks and stuff like that to encourage the development instead of letting it run farther down. Was that done at that time that they built those buildings, too, do you suppose? Well, the Metro Center was part of it, yeah. Yeah, but that's—we're going back to the library and— No, the library has—I keep thinking of that as the new addition that they put on it and the rebuilding of the thing. The library was built there long, long time ago. Right. And that was basically because it was the downtown area and central access to the thing. I think that when Rockford started out, I think the primary downtown area was from this side of the river over, wasn't it? I mean, east of—when you look at the old pictures, weren't they— Yeah, yeah. On east side, it was not on west state, it was always on east state. Right. So it started building out this way, but then— It went this way. It must have. Yeah, it jumped across the river. Actually, the west side of the river was the first part of the side of Rockford to start developing because they had—well, the Tinker Swiss Cottage has nothing to do with it, but they had a mill over there, a grist mill on the creek over there, and that is what—one of the first buildings that was developed in Rockford. And from there on, there was a little spreading of business then down Main Street, and a little ways north on Main Street, and then it started developing on State Street and jumped across the river, and I think more of East State Street was developed than West State Street ever was. But in the 20s, though, 15—1910, 15, 1920s, then there was 7th Street and— Yeah. —3rd Street, and there was the Swedish clan right there. Yeah. Wundergatan. Wundergatan. Wundergatan. Yeah. And you had to go down there, and the kids—we were given a nickel, and we'd stand there in front of the candy department while the folks would shop and do all kinds of things. 45 minutes later, we're still standing there trying to think where you get the most from them. A little nickel. And that was 7th Street. And that was kind of a social thing, too, to go down on 7th Street. You saw an awful lot of people down there. And they were all Swedish proprietors that owned the stores there. Oh, they sure were. Yeah, I can't think of anyone that wasn't. Sure. Yeah. 7th Street used to have festivals, too, where all the Swedes came out, and you met down there. Once in a while, we'd let somebody over from the West Side. Oh, they'd come over for the festivals. How could you notice if somebody came from the West Side, though? They didn't speak Swedish. I don't know, but you know, when you look back on it, you really can remember that we thought we were a pretty tight little community down there. And I guess when you saw seven or eight kids coming together that you didn't know, you assumed that they were those kids from the West Side over there. Yeah, that's about the truth. That's about the truth. But they were quite popular, those festivals. They started out many, many years ago. And they brought people together. Yeah, they did. Yeah, yeah. And I mean, they had— The Salvation Army was in the big part of it, too. They'd go from corner to corner. And I can remember following from corner to corner to listen to them. They had string instruments, then, or— No, they had a good band. I was even in the Salvation Army band, Frelsnings Armenia. Frelsnings Armenia. Yeah. I see. I played the— How did you come in there, though? Because your dad was not interested in the— No, but they insisted that we had to go to Sunday school. I told them. Whichever church they were close to, they had to go to. But Dad always liked the Salvation Army. He never belonged, but he'd never miss Yugluta. And he went to church in Salvation Army, then? Yeah, yeah. If they went to church, they went to Frelsnings Armenia, yeah. So you played with them for a while? Yeah, yeah. Did you learn to play in high school? No, I learned to play there. They taught us— At Frelsnings Armenia? Yeah, they taught us to play there. You played string or horn? No, a horn. E flat alto horn. And then from there I played the cornet once, a little bit too. But the E flat alto was basically my instrument. How long did you stay in there to play? I guess— Well, until I was probably a junior, senior in high school, something like that. Then I—well, the war was on then. And I got a job at J.I.K.'s company, which at that time was not making any farm implements. What they were doing was building wings for the B-26 bomber. And they were so short of help out there that I was working there after school every night. And going to school during the day, working out there at night. So that didn't leave a whole lot of time to be involved in much of anything else. And I did that, I think, for the last year that I was going to high school. And before that I had a job as a soda jerk. And even then I was working till 11 o'clock at night on that job. So there wasn't any time for anything. But when you played for them, that meant that you had to be with the service then? No, yeah, yeah. We— So you had to— Well, the big thing was marching up and down 7th Street. We'd play at the corner of 5th Avenue and 7th Street first. Moved up to the corner of 4th Avenue and 7th Street, and ended up at the corner of 3rd Avenue and 7th Street. And hit every one of the corners when we was out on an evening. I see. But how about in the church now, when they have their sermons and gatherings, did you play there too? Yes. Yeah, also. You know, that was something that's interesting we found out, just didn't find it out, recalled it more or less. Frank's sister joined our church, the Lutheran Church. She had never had a real affiliation until she joined our church about four years ago. And in the course of the instructions, they asked if she had been confirmed—baptized. And they didn't think they had because they had been going to the Salvation Army primarily. And our Lutheran minister said at that time that he didn't think any Salvation Army man would baptize a child. It just wasn't done. And somewhere along the line, Frank's mother and father must have more or less insisted on it. And Frank and Toots and a couple other ones are the only ones that they can recall were ever baptized in the Salvation Army here in Rockford. And it was never done in the temple. It was done in a home. I see. Yes, it was at Carlson's. Oh. And normally the Salvation Army does not believe in baptizing, but they did the kids. So they were baptized— By a Salvation Army? Yes. A chaplain, what do they call him? Major, yeah. Major Perry. Yeah. But they insisted that the kids were going to be baptized, so I guess the Salvation Army thought they didn't want to lose them at all. So yeah, we'll do something. It's interesting, like your parents, no, your father especially, he was not interested in religion as such, but he had the foresight to get you into it, though. Yes, yes. To make your choice whether you like it or not. Well, one of the things was—one of the contractors in town was named Andrew Anderson, and he was, I think, one of the guys that essentially got my father started working here. And he was very big in Bethany Methodist Church, and we lived three houses down from Methodist Church. And that's the first place that we ever ended up going to Sunday school. And that was basically because Andrew Anderson was a big shot there, and it was close to home. And besides that, Preston, Mr. Eliason was his name. And he was a—I loved that guy, too. He was a very good friend to my dad, and Eliason had—he was not a preacher from the beginning. What he had been was a sailor, and I mean a real sailor. He'd sailed on the old schooners, real sailcraft. And I remember he's the only minister I ever saw that was tattooed up and down both all his arms. A real gentleman, but if he'd been a sailor, you know, he was very worldly, too. And my dad had an awful lot of respect for him, basically, because he knew he had been around, and he was still— Was he an old man then when you met him as a pastor? He was, yeah, probably about 10 years older than my dad, I'd say, because their children, as I remember, their oldest daughter was probably about 10 years older than I was then, so this is— just going by ages, this would be my thinking. But he was senior to dad and mom, anyhow. So you joined the Methodist Church then? Yeah, the first church we ever joined was— So he never pressed you into joining all this pastor, all that or something? No, no, he did not. My dad used to go over there and do a lot of work for him, too, when he was— well, this was at the time that he'd had the stroke that we were living close to then. And just, I think, basically, as a Christian thing to do, he'd have dad come over there and do a few things that really didn't amount to a heck of a lot, but it gave him a chance to earn a dollar or two. And I suppose eventually the church ended up getting it back anyhow through us or the folks when they did attend church there. If there were special occasions, they would go, but that was about it. Did you join the Svenska Brydarförbundet or Scandinavian Fraternity? Yes. Did you join there with your wife or did you join with your parents? No, my parents never belonged to them. They never belonged to it? No, they belonged to Vasa and Dala Föreningen in Chicago. So there was no Dala Förening in Rockport? No, no, no. There were not too many of Dala folk here in Rockport? No, not really. There was, what was it, there was a, was it Skåningard that had their... Yeah, there was a Skåningard and there was a Småland too, wasn't there? Yeah, there was a Smålandsförening here too. And Ölands could have been quite a few. Yeah, but there never was anyone from Dalarna that I remember. No, there was quite a settlement of that in Chicago, and that's why they went back into there. Yeah, well, they had friends in Chicago that were from, I guess they knew from the old country. Did you join them too in Chicago? No, I never did. My sister did, but I never did. Actually, I think the time when they were most active and had most to do with them was at the time that I was in the Navy. Oh, you were drafted and doing the work? No, I enlisted. Enlisted? Yeah, and at that time, that's I think when they really had their deepest contact with them. And after I got out of the Navy, as soon as I got out, we got married and started our own lives, and that did not include going in there. Because at that time, it was just the folks and, well, Tootsie was with them, I guess, and would go with them. So this is when you joined the Scandinavian Fraternity through your wife's parents? Yeah. My dad is, yeah. To carry on. Yeah. And you are still carrying on and off? Yeah, there are four of us. Four of us. Four of us. That's it. But at the time that we belonged or first joined it, it was very active. We had picnics and doings. Conventions. Yeah. And like I talked to your wife now here, there has been tremendous support of all the people, the extra money we get when we are sick. Well, it's important. Even if it's a small amount, it's still a good feeling. Yeah, yeah. The feeling that somebody is thinking about them. Yeah, yeah, that certainly is. In fact, if they're sick, I try to find an excuse to pay them as much as I can because when it's all over for us, I don't want to have a cent left in the treasury. Do they call you then? Yeah. When they are under the weather situation? Yeah. Cassette two, side two. Mr. and Mrs. Frank Olson, Rockford, Illinois. Where did that go? No, I really don't know, Curly. We were talking about this, Maya Carlson, when she does call. She obviously can recall when she got the last check and how much it was for, and by the time she ends up telling me about everything and Frank comes home, I now have got Maya Carlson's accent because I know that shack came through. She says, I got the bet. And by gosh, she knows when that shack is supposed to come through. And she calls two, three times. But it's like you say, I think belonging to something too. Yeah. They belong to that for as long as I can remember. Yeah, I think they're one of the oldest. You have seen a lot of them die off in the last 15 years. Oh, yeah. A lot of them have just left. And what kind of, have you had entertainment or programs on your meetings or what have you, when you come together then? Let's say 15 years ago, for instance. 15 years ago? What were you doing then at the meetings? Oh, basically conducting the business. Once in a while they'd have potlucks. You had the password? Yeah. You had the password? Yeah. What was the significance of the password? Significance was... To keep someone out? Yeah. Well, why? I mean, I said to them, there's nothing further away. That's it. We never even had a doorman for I don't know how long. And if anybody came, we knew everyone that belonged to the lodge. But you went through the rituals just the way it was done 15 years earlier? Yeah. In Swedish or in English? Because you could handle the Swedish talk. It was always in English as long as I was a member there. But they went through the whole thing then, and if somebody died, you'd raid the charter? Yes. For instance? Yes. But I think the main significance of the password comes into play more when you have your district convention, when you're getting people from a number of lodges that are going to go into the convention. Then you're supposed to have the password. So this is a good practice then to use during the meetings also? Yeah. Yeah. You were talking about Maja. That reminds me. Her daughter, Ingrid, that I was talking about. She saw me up at the store one day, and I was wearing a T-shirt that I got that says Drahtskogen on it. And when I saw, next time Ingrid called me up for something, she says, Hello there, Drahtskogen! And I knew right away who it was that was talking to me. That's hard to explain for an American. Yeah, it is. Every place you go, what does that say? I tell them Drahtskogen. They say, What does that mean? How are you going to explain that in English? All I say is head for the woods. That's a literal translation. That doesn't really mean anything at all. But it was my dad's favorite expression. When anything ever went wrong, Drahtskogen, you'd hear it as loud as a good. Did they go back to Sweden, any of your parents? My mother and father did. They went back? I think my folks went back twice. Yeah, they did. My folks never had any desire to go back, and I don't understand that. How about you now? Have you visited Sweden? No. I don't think they want to go. So bad. Do you have contact with them? We do with his side. Now, when his cousin was here last spring, we sent names back, and he did find names and said to us that we do have cousins, I have cousins there. But I would assume that he would have given them our address because I said I wanted to keep in contact, but I have not heard. I do feel next year we hope to go if we possibly could, and I do know that if we went over there, I don't think it would be hard to find them, and contact would start in again with them. Both on Frank's side and my side, I think there are people that are business, so I think maybe there would be a case where maybe they would want to travel back and forth. When did you start to follow in your father's footsteps to be a navy player? After I got out of the Navy, I worked in a shop, I think, for about four or five months, something like that. And then that was for Free Sewing Machine Company, and then they start talking about going out of business. And at that time, I decided that if I'm going to do anything, I might as well make a move before they really fold up. So I went to work with my dad, and yeah, it was about six months, I guess, after I got out of the Navy. So he taught you then how to spread the mortar? Yeah. Yeah. No, well, I worked as a laborer, I think, for a year, wasn't it, about that? And then I decided I might as well learn the other trade, too. At the time, I was actually signed up to be a plasterer, but he says, that's the dumbest thing you can do. You're going to be wet all your life. He says, if you've got to get into some trade, you might as well be a bricklayer, and that was it. And you'll stay with it then? Yeah, that'll be 40 years next year. 40 years. Yeah. That's the way it was done in Sweden, though. If you were—you followed in the footsteps in Sweden, too. You followed what your father did there, so I suppose— Oh, yeah, and believe it—the building trades in Rockford was basically Swedish right from the start. And at the time I got in, and for a long time before and after, you did not get in the trade unless you were the son of a bricklayer. I see. So they were very strict, and there was union and— Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah. You became a union man then immediately as an apprentice? Yeah, yeah. Dad was—he was always the doorman for the local, and I've been vice president, and now I've been recording secretary for—I don't know. For the local union. For 15, 20 years, I think I've been the recording secretary. So you've been very active in— Yeah, there was—at the time that I got in, well, George Schlupp was talking to me the other day. He said he fought, and he fought to get in to the bricklaying, and he had an awful time because he was not the son of a bricklayer. And at that time, I think, you know, Edgar Pedersen, another—he was unfortunately a Norwegian, but he was still the head of the apprentice committee, and I don't know, he was probably president at the time, too. And he would not let George come in because he was not the son of a bricklayer. Was that a good idea, you know, I think? Was it really—is it an open-minded, liberal thinking that you have to have it like that to sort out people to move on to— That's terrible to do. It is terrible. It's terrible. Yeah. Because there are people, you know, they are very suited for one kind of job, but if they don't fall in that line, they cannot be the king. No. Well, at the time, they did have to change things and allow others in because there were not that many guys, or sons, let's say, that were interested in becoming a bricklayer. And then they loosened up a little bit. Yeah, yeah. And especially after the war, when the whole building boom started, you could not keep up and find enough people that were willing to even be apprentices for a long time. I can tell you the first Italian that was allowed to come into the Scandinavian fraternity because he married a Swedish girl and his name was Oscar Noretta. That's how tight things were. But he came in, though. He came in. Isn't that funny how things like that stick in your mind? And same way with the Union, they wouldn't let him in. You mean he came in without being blackballed? He did because he was married to a Swede. Maybe you've taken the blackball away. No, no. Well, for them, for that lodge, it was good for a long time because Oscar was a hard worker. But the thing is, he did not get along too good because he was rather domineering and a lot of them guys were not going to take that from— From an Italian, not from a Swede. Right. But he did work hard, a very hard worker. So he wanted to prove himself, I suppose, to be a good worker and— To belong to an organization and give forth to it. What's your position? As long as he was a good worker, I'm sure he felt that I should have a little bit to say about things, too. And this did not go so pretty good. Same way as letting him in the Union. If you're going to be a good worker, why do that? You talk about me liking politics and me talking about it and stuff like that, and I said to you I'm a rabble-rouser. I am with Frank on the unions, too, aren't I? Sometimes we can get going. She got some good ideas, though. I want to tell you what I took on, the man from the National Union. The break-letters? Yes, he came to Rockford and it was a dinner and he suggested very nicely, and this happened to be at the bar, too, so I thought, well, I got it here, I can see. He suggested very strongly that we support and do all we could to support Edward Kennedy. How many years ago was that? Well, the first time— How many years ago was that when Edward Kennedy was running, was trying to run for nomination? It was in the A.D.? Yeah. Could have been. Yeah. The first time when Reagan was elected. Well, I took the fellow on from the National Office in—I guess I was quite vocal. Although I'm such a staunch Democrat, but I cannot see inflicting on anybody. You have to, because you belong to this association. That is wrong. That is wrong. Well, he was pushing Kennedy over Carter. That's what was going on. Yes. And his attitude was that it would benefit the unions. And I don't think that we should elect a president just because it's going to benefit one organization over another. Yeah, but that's usually what politics is running, though. I mean, they influence each other. Right. But you are probably a— But I cannot see— Democratic, right? Right. I can't see—you have to do it. And I told him nobody was going to tell me what to do. Not even at the bar? Nobody was going to tell me what to do. And we had quite some discussion. We had the whole bar going on there. As a matter of fact, there was a couple that was sitting— This is why Kennedy lost, perhaps. It could be. There was a couple sitting next to us that got into the discussion with us, too. And in the course of the conversation, after I had done all this arguing, and, God, I was eloquent that night. And afterwards, we questioned the man as to, did he work out in that area? And he said, yes, he happened to work at Barker Rockford, where our son worked. And I said, oh, my God. And I went like that. And he said, why? And I said, my name is Marian Olson. I have the son Dale Olson. Don't you know what? That went back to my son the next day. My, but your mother quite strongly opinionated about this. So Jimmy Carter, he was quite loud. How about the Union, the Bricklayers? Because quite a few Italians are Bricklayers. Yeah. Did they come into on the East Side and join? Yeah, yeah. They— How early? Before your time, you think? Yeah, I would say. They were involved. I'll tell you how. Because the tile setters, marble workers, all of that is part of our Union, too. And they are kind of specialists in that field. Yeah, yeah. There were more Italians that came over here that got into that end of it. And as long as they were part of the same organization, I think some of the sons started drifting into the masonry end of it then and getting away from the tile and the marble work. So we had them in there, oh, as long as I can—was a member, we've had a number of them. But there has not been a great number of them. It is still— In Swedish? Well, it's getting a mixed bag now, really. But I would say the majority of them are still of a Scandinavian descent. So when you came into it then and it was like a son follows the father. Yeah. Was that a Swedish idea, you think, or was it somebody else's? To have it that way, you can only— No, I think it's a trade thing, really. But it's in other cities, too? Yeah. Oh, yeah. Isn't it only in Sweden? Yeah, but that was years ago, though, not— No, I don't know, I don't think so, but that was years ago. You used to follow the— Well, I would say it's not carried on to the extent now that it was at the time that I started, 40 years ago. Because I'm sure you're supposed to get the bricklayers and painters and carpenters. There isn't any shortage right at the moment, but what we have here is a lot of the guys that got into the trade when it was good, right after the war, are reaching retirement age now. So there's going to be a period coming up in a few years now when there's going to be, I think, a shortage. How about the young people? Of journeymen. Are they taking— No, they're not interested in it because it is too hard work. Too hard. It's much easier to sit and punch buttons on a computer. But you look like a healthy guy now. I mean, you haven't— No, I haven't suffered from it one bit. Frank— It is a tough job, though. Oh, you betcha it is. Frank made the decision after he went back to school, instead of going on with his schooling and getting into the teaching end or some other end, to go into that because of the love of accomplishing something with his hands. Something that's standing long after the computer tape has run out more. You can take a ride in this afternoon and show the people what you have done. Oh, yes. Many times. We used to do that with his father. His father would say, I worked on that building and I struck that corner. Now Frank is doing that to the kids when he goes by. I did that corner. How about your kids now? You have how many? Three. Three boys? No, no. No, no, no. Two boys and one girl. I'm sorry. Yeah. Yeah. And are they interested in politics and unions and organizations like you have been and your parents have been? I would say no. No. They don't spend any time on that? No. Do they discuss it with you? Well, the thing, no, they're really very family oriented and the family is, I think, the main thing as far as they are concerned. So the difference is that your parents, especially your parents, they have to have organizations to survive more or less? Yes, I would say so. Your kids didn't have to have that? No. Home entertainment came about and no, they didn't. They got the TV when they were growing up? The whole stereo units, what do they call that, the entertainment unit? They didn't need it. And at work they had full insurance, hospitalization? Yeah, yeah. So they don't have to worry about it. Right, right. There's retirement. But the people now that you have belonged to with friends in the Scandinavian fraternity, a lot of those people, maybe 100% of them 50 years ago, they didn't have anything else covering them up in case of injury or insurance. They had to belong to an organization like that. My father never had insurance at all. It was only through the Scandinavian fraternity? That was it. I don't think my father had any insurance until the time that he retired and went on Social Security. I can't ever remember my father ever talking about it. I can remember at the age of 18, and you know how, no, it was when I became engaged. An insurance agent called me and asked me if I had insurance, and I talked to my father about it, and my father said, that is up to you. When you're 18 and you're working, you're on your own. And I took out my own insurance, and I know my dad didn't have any at that time. There was no need to. The only insurance my folks ever had was on the house and the car, and that was it. You've been working now 40 years. When you started with the bricklayers union, did you take out your own insurance or did you have the Scandinavian fraternity only? No, I took out Blue Cross or something like that, whatever. Where you started? Yeah. 40 years ago? Yeah. But that was not through the union or anything. That was complete private? Yeah. And then I started working for GRIP. They had a group policy through Blue Cross. But you also had through the veterans, though, because you've been in the service. Well, that's a life insurance policy, yeah. But that's all. No hospitalization? No, no. You may go to a veterans hospital because if you are afflicted with something that could be traced to— Service. Yeah, service-related. You had nothing to do with your own life? No, no, no. And you were on your own? Yeah. No, we've always carried a hospitalization policy, whether it was private or through the union. Well, the union started carrying a policy, so the Blue Cross at that time was superfluous because it didn't cover anything that wasn't covered through the union policy. And that's been in effect for probably 20 years now. Before then, there wasn't really any coverage through employment. So you were pioneers then in your generation to carry over from the old one with no insurance other than organizations like the Scandinavian Fraternity and Vasa. I guess. You were the first generation that took out the coverage of policy? No, they never had any that I know of. It was left up to us. My folks wouldn't even—my dad said that he couldn't afford to do anything like that. Don't you suppose they could afford to belong to the Scandinavian Fraternity, which would benefit them the social things too, but putting money into something like that was like a pick and a poke? I mean, you know, I just don't think they ever thought of doing it that way. If they could have the money in a sock or in the bank, that was different. Well, I think their membership and stuff like that was almost a twofold thing because they did gain a little bit in benefits, but what they gained mostly was social. Yeah, it had to be. Yeah, yeah. That was the main thing. Her mom and dad were very willing workers whenever anything was going on, and I know my mom and dad were also hard workers at both the Vasa and the dollar trading doings. Although the old people like that had it, though the Italians had it and still have it. They had quite—Polish people did. Well, I wonder if there is still—people that are immigrating now, I think there are probably more Italians and southerner European people coming to this country now than there are from the northern countries, because I think, well, Sweden is probably a little more financially secure than Italy is, if you look at how many times Italy's government has fallen. Yes, quite a few times. Are their organizations, like the Italians and the Polish, are they as strong as the Swedish ones? Probably stronger. Stronger. They are more united. Stronger now. Yeah, yeah. Because the Swedes, they are everything under the sun. Sure. Yeah, yeah. No, that's part of it, I'm sure. Part of that. Yeah. And, well, the Lithuanian club in town is very, very strong and very active. The White Eagles, that's the Polish. They are. And you have the Lomardi and the Verdi and I don't know what other Italian clubs, but they are also very active.