 we are in the center of the room in 1987. I sit here with Waldemar Orvald Gustafsson, who is now in the guard for Illinois. He was born in 1908 or 1929 in Fjellbacka in Bosnien and came to Denmark in 1929. Your father was... A Martin Huggare. Martin Huggare, and he came from Blekinge. What was the reason for moving to the west coast? This was a building in Bogotland at that time. Kullgren Enka? Kullgren Enka. Yes. And I learned with him, it also works. He was a boy. I see. I have not found out. I do not know. So he came, he was born in Saksboden? Yes, in Blekinge. He came to Fjellbacka as a young man. He married your mother? He married my mother, yes. And you lived in Fjellbacka? Yes, we lived there, but maybe half a mile north. Not right in the city, but a little bit. So the stone quarries were on the south side? Yes, that was the case. But we did not know each other. How old were you when you started? I was 15 years old when I started. I learned that, it was three years. How did you continue? I worked for an electric company. I worked for 13 years, then I went to the army. I was a scout in Gothenburg. In the battalion? Yes, it was there in the winter of 1928-1929. When I came home, I went to America. I came home in April. I went to America, then here. What did you learn in the quarry? We made street stones. It was mostly street stones. It was more complicated, with harder rocks. How did you learn this? Did your parents teach you? My father. He was my father, and I was a teenager. I was alone in my own quarry. No company? No, I learned fast. I was good in that time. But you did not like it? No. Was it cold in the winter? Yes, it was hard work and cold. I had to do all the work. You did not get paid? We had a little money at that time, but not much. So you were 11 children in the family? Yes, 11 children. We were never home at once. We went out to the farm. We made food. So when you were 15, you left home? Yes, I was 15 when I started. You should know what the state was. I was 9 or 10 years old. I was in three different farms. We had a little room for the kids. We had a lot of kids. You had seven children. Were they older or younger? I was the fourth from the top. I had two older brothers and one older sister. So the older ones were already exiled? Yes, they were exiled. When you started working, they had already left home. What kind of work did they get? Your brothers, what did they get? They were in the Swedish army. Did they recruit? Yes, they recruited. In 1917? Yes, in 1917. One came here to America after. He came to Chicago first. So you had an older brother who was exiled? Yes, he was in America two years before I came here. He was in Sweden. He started in a farm, but he didn't like it. He went to Gothenburg. He got a job in......a canal, a drilling. He worked in the canal. He lived in Gothenburg until he died. What did your father say when he saw the boys leaving the quarry? He said, of course, he spent a lot of time to teach me. It took a long time to be good drunkard. And you could never be any good. Because you had to be......the stones had to be so many centimeters. And then level and square, you know. And the cup, they called it a cup, and it had to be smooth and nice. Then you'd slant a little bit. And we got 10 cents a piece for each one of us, I guess. That's about all we got. 10 Euro? 10 Euro. But then you had to... If you go to what they call a big quarry......you didn't have to burn your own pieces. Big blocks, you mean? Yes. But if you go to a big quarry......you'd get them......they'd take them out to you, because it was a lot of work. You'd get a crane, you know, a crane. And......it paid so much for that. It cost so much. It was better, because you didn't have to......big cold, as they called it. And......you had to use......the iron to close it, too. On the big blocks, you know. And my dad did that, you know. But then I had my own for a while. But then he helped me. Then I moved into this Storbrot. That was better. That was there until I got to the electric company. I had a future job there. I stayed there, I suppose. But the big boss talked to me. The reason I got the job was......I was a state champion in Sweden running. Bootsman, I mean. So you started out at an early age? Yes. I was 18 when I won the Bootspelen. They called it Bootspelen in Bootsland. They had it in Munkdal. They built the stadium there. In Munkdal? Yes. I was there at the construction site. They had the first......competition there. How did you get into running? Was it through school? Who told you you would become a runner? They didn't have any sports at the time. I read about Nörmö......and Vide. It was a farm in Sweden. I had a similar clip on them. I ran out in the farm and chased the cows. I was a cow-poo. I kept on running and running. We had a club then, but we didn't have any track to run on. I ran against the......around the very colourful Kurvan. It was about one mile around. In Fjellbakka? Yes. I got......first I ran around......I got less and less time. Finally I got down to......4.26. I started over five minutes. So......then......there was no one home to run and follow me around. I had one guy on a bicycle. He'd go and pull me on a bicycle, you know. To get my time down. He tried to set a time where the fare was going to go. So then one guy came home one night from......Grebelstad. His name was Nils Endor. How are... He was......top in the state at that time, you know. Boers... Boers... Boersbjörn, you know. He was one of the......toughest guys in there. He came home one night and he was playing soccer down in there. They called it Sumpan. It was a soccer field down there. So you played soccer and soccer? Yes, I played soccer too. I got a picture in a book from......it was in a book from Sweden. They sent me a book in there. I don't know what I got, I don't know. My picture was in there when the first soccer team we had in Kjellbakka. It was 1926, I think. So you were in the league too? Yes, yes. So then... Anyway, this guy came home from Grebelstad and he said......anybody running in Kjellbakka, I'd like to train. He said, have someone pull me for a half a mile anyway, you know. So I... He said, have you got a guy named Walde? They called me Walde in Sweden. Gustafsson, he's down playing soccer. Well, can't you get him? The guy came down and said that Engdahl is here and want to run with him. I said, he's too good for me, I don't want to run with him. And you knew him? I know he was... I heard he was good, you know. Engdahl. He was in a paper here. He said, he's too good for me. I said, you know. Oh, come on, my buddy said, you can beat him. I said, oh, God. So I pulled out my soccer shoes and put tennis shoes on. And I left there. And he said, try to stay with me for a half a mile or so. So I stayed there. And I started out, you know. But a lot of... The rest went there right on the... We started out, they called it Gröna Lyd. It was a famous... So that was like a run on the field? No, no, no, it was on the road. The country road and the street. The street was up this way, and you came out on the road, you know. And the road came around, you could see it from the curve. And you could see the road come back to the same place. He and all his girls up there, he was a big shot, you know. And they were, hey, hey, hey, he had come with spike shoes on and fancy shirts, you know, and stuff. And shorts, you know, I came in with soccer pants on, you know. Anyway, I started out, and I didn't think he went for this. First, I looked back, he was behind me. I didn't like I used to run, you know. So I kept on coming. And I was about 60, 70 meters ahead of him, you know. He came in passing, passing, and he was telling me. He said, he said, North, the star is born, he said, Selva kan Nordlöpare, fenomena, all that stuff. He gave me, he started telling the people, you know, how good I was. He said, you've been to Stätis, he said, you've got the Munkudal. And he didn't know who you were? No, never saw me before, you know. And that was the first time you saw Engdahl? No. So I kept on training, and I went to Munkudal. And he left, I didn't think I had a chance there, you know, anyway. I didn't think, I was scared to death. So then I thought late that night, and my mother said, you can't run today, you've been training all night. I said, I can't do it, I won't win that anyway, I said. So we left five o'clock in the morning, took a car to Munkudal, I guess it was, I think. Very early. Var det nån mere från Fjällbacka, eller var du den ende som kom? No, vi var andra också, but we didn't, you know, never got to the finals even. I was the only one that, we had a few guys from there, you know, shot put and this, but you know, they weren't any, we didn't have no, I mean, we didn't have no chance at all there, really. They were not up to snuff? No, they kept on all the day, they did all the night, and said, come to me, Var det, you gotta do it now, we depend on you. They ran two o'clock in the afternoon, the 1500 meter event, you know. So, then I came in the dressing room, you know, and I had socks and pants underneath, and tennis shoes, and the track was, wasn't set, it was loose, you know, because they hadn't had a chance to get it quite ready. Og du hade inte spikskoor den tiden? No, no. So, I came with tennis shoes and I ran around, there were big holes after me, you know. In the time, it was hard to run. I ran around the track a couple of times, and I came in the dressing room first, there was, Endall wasn't in there, but other guys, Sonny Chisholm was one, what was his name, Jyoti Grissel, his name was, now I forget him, Jyoti Grissel. He was the one that won before, they picked him to win, he was supposed to be the best in there, you know. So, I came in there, some guys laying there took ribbed on and stuff, you know, I pulled my pants and I said, What are you from? I said, From Fjellbakka. Oh, are you going to run today? Ja. Yes, I said. 1500 meters? Oh! And he said, Have you run on a track before? I said, No, I haven't. Well, he said, We can wear it to go now. Ja, I think so, ja. And he said, No spike shoes? Where's your spike shoes? I don't have any. And he said, You're going to run on that loose track with tennis shoes? I said, Ja, I can crawl down a hole in the ground, you know, for that then. And one guy, they were laughing, He might win, he might be the new champion today. And he said, Ja, he said, Laugh and have a good time with me, you know. I crawled down the hole and I fell to them. And we got out there, and I was just nervous as heck, you know. I just started and somebody gave me a shove, I got knocked off the course almost. How many of you started? Pardon? How many of you started? Ten? How many of you were on the starting line? Was it ten? How many of you were there? I think it was sixteen, but I'm not sure. But there were two rows or one row, you know. I got behind about, I must have been close to a hundred meters, before I got going again, you know. I got my shove, so I could build up my balance, you know. But then I started to pass them in the curves, you know. And I didn't know any better, I'd never been on a track before, you know. It's the worst thing you can do, you know, is run further. I passed them all after the, I wasn't after the first lap, almost, I was four times around. I think I was on my, I was ahead, and there was a guy from Shelbuck up in the stand. And they were pulling for me, and the guy said, Eh, that guy won't run one less, the longer that speed he is going. You guys didn't see, this guy is in Madison now, his name is Sven Lindgren, by the way. Madison, Wisconsin? Yeah, he came to America before I did, Yidbushka Breeze before. And then, anyway, as I passed, I was about sixty-seven yards ahead, and I looked back, and I told it to Yurte Grissel, he was supposed to have such a fast finish, he said, you know, kick, you know. And I won with eight seconds. Eight seconds? Eight seconds, yeah. What was the time, then, at 1500? I think it was, I'm not sure, but I think it was 4.26 or something. In the New England time. So the course was too soft for you? Yeah, but it was the best, I had the general competition, too. Best of all in Sweden, too. And they said, I'll run in one, instead of the mother course. And that was a 4.18, I think it was. But, I think, I haven't run in time, because I know. How did you feel, then? You came in eight seconds ahead, you had never run on a course before. No, I had never run on a course before. And you had Grissel, Engdahl wasn't in this race. Engdahl was in it. Oh, yeah. I don't remember, oh yeah, he came in third or something. What did he say to you when you... He said, I know I'm going to win, he said, after. But it was a big surprise for everyone. Huh? It was a big surprise for everyone. Oh, yeah, Fjällbäck, when I came to Fjällbäck, oh yeah. Were you sure of yourself when you... When I came to Fjällbäck, oh, I was a hero, Jesus. Oh, yeah. How did you feel, when you... Did you have any thoughts about you would beat Adam? No, no. I didn't. I was too scared. I hoped I didn't have to run, even. I didn't think I had a chance, you know. But I've always been that way. Even when I ran in Rackford against the high school team, I was the most better runner than they were. But I hadn't trained anything in the spring. So I was nervous when I went down there. Running against Rackford, you had it at Fairgrounds Park then. We didn't have no... I'd have stared them here then and there, you know. I sat in the car and I... I sat there, but I didn't... The guy said, what the hell are you worrying about? And I said, well, I don't know. He said, you know, I haven't... I haven't trained anything. You could... I know I should be better than them, I said, but... But... How do you train at home in Sweden now? Do you run in the terrain or up the hills in Bergen? I ran around that curve. That was all you trained? Yes. You didn't run up the hills? No. Here in America I did that, you know. Here I ran in Blackhawk Park, in Rackford. Stoltenstein Park, around here. On grass, a lot on grass. But you ran in the terrain races in Sweden? Oh, I ran in the mountain ranks. You did? Yes, I won every year there, you know. Was that 5000 or how long? No, we didn't have that much. It was shorter than that, maybe 2000 or something. But it was only clubs around Skjällbacka. That was early in the spring? Yes, it was just local more like. But I didn't know... I came to America. In 2008 I went to......Armenia. No, I went to Armenia in 2009. How... But... Weren't they interested in Munkudal and Uddevalla and wanted to have you, for example, as a coach? Oh, yes, yes. Did you get a offer? Yes, I wanted to be a baker and everyone could work in the clubs. I got an offer from... To hire you? Yes. But you didn't get anything from them? No, I got a job for an electric company. And that was in Trattosjäl? Yes, he was a coach in a boat. He was a road worker in Åkerlund. He lived in Fjällbacka at the time. What was his name? Åker? Åkerlund. Åkerlund? Åkerlund, yes. And he was building lines from Helvatsholm to Strömstad. And different parts of the boat in Strömstad. He had about 20,000 volts power line, you know, electric line. And when he... After I came home from Munkudal, he said, you're not going to be a strong coach. I said, I'm going to give a job with the company. You were a coach in Åkerlund when you won the race? Yes, I was a coach. So, I said, you're not going to be a coach. He said, you're going to be an electric... I said, I don't know anything about electric. Don't worry, we'll put you in a gang and we'll train you. You start on a line first, he says. So, I started him and he said, you stick with me, you're going to have a future. He said, you have a stone career. Don't worry about it. Okay, I said, so then I got into the army. And I wrote America in the meantime. But I had a chance in my mind I wasn't going to go. Because I had a good job with the electric company. But then this brother wrote, stay in Sweden, take the test in America. I was 29, and I said, okay. But then I said, I want to go and I'm going to come back in a couple of years. So, when I came home from the army, I changed my mind. But I hadn't told him, so he sent me a ticket. He had sent me a ticket. Your brother? Yes. Then I didn't want to back out then, so I went. I said, I'll go and I'll come back in a couple of years. And my electric company boss, he talked to me. He said, don't go to America. He said, you've got a future here. In America you haven't got a chance. You don't know the language. He said, you can't talk English. He said, and it's going to be here you've got a future, he said, with the company. I said, I've got to go for a couple of years anyway, and I'll come back. Well, he said, come and see me right away. Then I came home and I started to like it too, even as a western person. I guess I was too proud to go back as a Moneysko-Bakan, you know. I think I stuck here. What do you think was the reason you came here? Was it your brother who pushed you? No, first I came to Chicago, and I worked in an outside labor, public place. And I had to go, I had to travel on a tread car, south and west and south and east to find a place to go, you know. I couldn't talk English and ask. So my brother had to take me out the night before, and I had so many jobs with the far away. So we started going? Yeah. So many hundred blocks on the south, so many, whatever it was, north, so many west, and so many north again and so on, and then the water. And you couldn't see out because it was so fast in Chicago, you know. It was a year off, yes. But anyway, it ended up that I got laid off in the last job. I had a friend in Rockford. I have a dog, and it came from Fjellbakka, too, but he's dead now. He died. And he was in Rockford. We were buddy-buddies, you know, from when we grew up together. So I told my brother. His brother was in Chicago and visited. So my brother was working, and I was home alone that day. So he stopped at my brother's where we lived, you know. I forgot where I was now. And I said, I'm going to go visit Rockford. Go visit Rockford. So I went home to Rockford on a bus, and I went to this buddy's house, friend's house, and he got me a job up at bookcase. That's where the Soviet army used to be. The furniture room. Yeah. Yeah, the last building on 18th Avenue, on the fourth floor, was my first job in Rockford. Jeez. Then, it was a good morning. We made 65 cents an hour that time on piecework. It wasn't a finishing, but it was not a very good job. But then, the last year, I think, then it got better little by little, you know. And I lived out in Camp Anvil. I'll go try to be told you that. Or out at the I.G.T. Goodhamter Park, yeah. All summer. Lived with Manfred Mellin and Fritzjof Eck and Simon Lindstrom. Had a tent out there. Stayed in a tent, and Manfred Mellin and this Eck, they had a tent out there, too. So we ate together, you know. We cooked together. So you were all... I wasn't working then. You were all victims of unemployment. Yeah. And we got, I think we got a dollar and a half, a dollar and a quarter a week from the welfare that time. To keep you going. We lived on that, I guess, mostly. So Si Lindstrom, he was on that team, too? Simon Lindstrom. But he worked at a log company. You know, Simon died about a year ago. Yes. Yeah, but he had a job, see, at a log company. And Eric Johnson, too, was in the tent with him. But he came out there to live with you and... Well, yeah, no, he didn't... he stayed on weekends only. He worked a little bit. He got an hour, but... But I got to stay in the tent, see, then we came out on weekends. Not all the time, but most of the time. He had a big tent out there, big, with a wooden floor in it. Fancy one. But... And you fixed your own food, then, you... We fixed our own food together, all of us. Tried to fix our own breakfast and stuff. Then a good time, just came out the members, you know. They brought out some stuff to the studio. They were good. I belonged to a good time at that time, to Vega. They brought out coffee, cakes and stuff, and... And we got a little bit to eat, but it was... It wasn't too good sometimes, you know. But before that, then I moved back to... I'm moving to Florida again. Back to 6th Street. What a nice family, I lived with them there, and... And I got a job in a restaurant on 7th Street. They called it Swedish Inn. And this friend of mine worked there. He got me in there, too. I was a dog, and the one that died. And we came to Rockport. And we got two meals a day, and then we worked all day. Mopping floors, washing dishes. Then I lived with the family on 6th Street. They let me live upstairs. A nice... Finally, the husband had a job, a toolmaker. So he said to his wife, why should we let Waldo work there, he said, for his meals? You can eat something here, he says, and help you out. They kind of liked me. We were four up there. They kicked three of them out. And they let me stay. They couldn't pay the rent, you know. So I stayed there and helped the lady out. But I didn't have much to eat upstairs. I had to try to cook a little bit when I first started. But I was proud to tell you that I didn't have anything. So I go out to the grocery store for her and stuff, and buy stuff. And one time, I never forget, we went to Hess Brothers, and they had a sale on women's union suits. I didn't know women wore union suits then. There was nothing like it. Did you, Myrtle? Yeah, they did. Yeah. And he wanted me to go down and pick out and buy two union suits. I was a little bit kind of embarrassed at first, you know. But I didn't care. He told the size, I guess, and I said, don't worry. I can order them. It's the right thing. So then one day, she said to me, he says, boy, you going to eat upstairs? Yeah. We had a bread box pulled out from the corner, wooden thing like that, you know. Then we had left bread crusts from all the time we'd been there. It was hard and stuff. And I soaked it, and I had the coffee, and I lost a lot of weight, I guess. He said, you look up, you're getting thin. I was running through training, you know. Oh, you were still training and running? Yeah. So he said, do you have any eggs up there? Yeah, I think we have some eggs there. He said, one day, he said, I got some onions on the porch out there in a basket. He said, you help yourself to them onions. Take some upstairs. He said, and fry them. I said, OK. So I took the basket, I guess there were two baskets there. One basket underneath the chair. I took them, a big handle of the onions, you know, went up and fried them. They weren't too big. They were kind of small. So I fried the damn thing, and I didn't taste very much. It didn't get brown. But I had quite a bit in the frying pan. So I ate them, you know. And the next day, I came down, she said to me, did you have any of my onions? Yeah, I said, Mrs. Frantin, but they were not too good. They kind of flat. I said, no, she said, no, I had them. She said, yesterday, I said, they were really good. She said, then she said, where did you take them onions? Siden 2. Siden 2, fortsättning med valiga säsong. Siden 2. But when you run into this snag or difficulty, I mean, depression and everything, you were still running here. Didn't you dream back then to Fjällbacka, Munkedalen, Uddevalla? No, I didn't. I mean, back there, you were a champion. I mean, everybody knew you at that time. You were the one that was laying behind you. Yeah, I lay behind me. How could you do that? Didn't you feel... No, you're young. When you're young, you don't think about those things. Everything is glory, then you think. You don't think like you do when you get older. Why didn't you go back there after a couple of years, as you promised? I didn't go back. I got in with the club, the Swedish Gym Club here. Did you have money saved enough? No, no, I didn't have money saved. I got money from the company in Sweden, I think, I voted for, if I wanted to go back. They would have wanted you back. Yeah, but I was too proud to ask for that. When you get age, you change fast, you know. You get... You don't think about the future so much. No, you got... I got along good with people in Rakpolle. But before getting to Rakpolle, more than all, you were drafted, in other words, to Krigsbataillonen in Boden. Why did you pick that one, or did they pick it for you? Oh, yes. I came in to be examined. They hated that in Sweden, that I was to go to Siberia in Russia. Well, that was against the young people. They hated that up there in Boden, you know about that. You're not born in Sweden, though. Yeah, I'm born in Sweden. Are you? Yeah. They hated Boden. Everybody hated Boden. So I came in to be examined, you know. Was it in Uddevalla? Yeah, Uddevalla. I guess, I think so. You had your mönstra? Yeah, mönstra. So then they asked me if I wanted to come in sport. Oh, yeah, big mark. I'm a board-sledding champion runner. Oh, they said, Dr. Smiling, we got a skier here. I was a bit shocked. Oh, I said, I can't ski. I never skied in my life. They said, don't worry. You have good wind. You're a runner. They teach you how to ski up there. Don't worry about that. I figured, well, I'm going to go to America anyway. I applied. I get by before someone had to go in. I was supposed to go in the year after, you see. So you had applied for visa to get in? Yeah, oh, yeah. But, you see, they talked me before they were supposed to take me. On the corner of my birthday. So in the same year, I registered. Then I had written to the king. You had to write to the king, you know. So I wrote. Then I got an answer from the king. So I had to go in to the army. Went in in October. I went up there in October. Took me two days and a night to get up there on the slow train, you know. And you were the only one from the country that you knew of? Yeah. No friends? Then I met other ones on the train going up from different, well, they probably came from Borås and different places in Sweden, I guess. Southern part of Sweden. But it was hell up there. But you came together with the best runners and the best skiers and everything up there. Oh, yeah. How did you get along with them? I mean, were you able not to stay? Did you get your skis after a while? Oh, yes, I got good on skis. I got across country all the time, you see. So you were starting out green, and in other words, you had no skiing experience. I was good on it. It was cross country skiing. How long did it take you now to get used to it? Before I... Get used to skiing, in other words. Oh, it didn't take too long. The first map, there wasn't any snow right away, but the snow came pretty soon. Then we were out exercising, you know, without skis. But you didn't go into running and climbing and stuff like that because you had... Yeah, I made good time when you had ski meets, you know. Were you able to... You had ski meets between the company and them. And when you're all done, you go home and see that you're all done for the day. Go to the cafe and have coffee. I go like a son of a gun when I get home first, you know. So were you able then to stay abreast with the rest of them? Oh, yeah. You had no trouble? No, no, no, no. I was good at that, but in downhill skiing, that stuff, it was different. But cross-country, I was good at that. I could hold my own there. Oh, yeah. I had good wind and I was pretty strong being a stonecutter in the wood collector company. I was in good shape, you see. No, no. But... Did you like it? No, I hated the damn skis. You did? Oh. You go out, it was cold up there, you know. 30 degrees, 30 below zero. Come out in the morning, you had to stand this way. If you're frozy, then it gets snow. Rub your nose in. Rub it in your cheek and, you know. And one day we come out, the sergeant stand there. Hey, cream puffs. He had a different name for us. Chikling or something, I guess. Can't take cold weather, huh? And it was 30 below, I think, that morning. So it wasn't long before some guy hollered out, Sergeant, your left cheek is frozen. Boy, did you ever go inside then, all of us? For the soldier's instruction. Then we were inside that morning. We didn't have to go out then, but... But I mean, go out at midnight sometimes on penalty training and stuff like that, too, you know. Lay and sleep good. 11 o'clock, 11.30. Sergeant, come in, hollered. Not the sergeant, the corporal. Filled pack and stuff, you know. Go down to the ski boots, get them skis out. Roar, roar, roar, creak in the snow. Cold and stuff. Go out a couple of hours, come back home, and then go to sleep again, you know. Boy, how they hated it. Then we went on a maneuver for 10 days. And we lay out in tents, you know. We went 20, 30 miles north of Boden, up north. That's far you can go. There wasn't a house or anything in miles, you know. And we had to sleep in a tent, you know, and go somewhere each day. And when we got up there, we had to go make... At night, you had to dig the snow out first. Then they put limbs from evergreens and stuff on the bottom. And they made a fire in the middle of the tent, you know. But there were two rows. There was one platoon in the tent, I think. Or was it one group? I don't know. Two rows, they were laying next to the fire. They kept pretty warm. But you see, those, they stayed... Outside? Outside. It was not raining. We had our uniforms on and everything, you know. We tried to keep... We didn't feel the heat at all, you see. We had everything on. I think we had gloves on too, I think. And we were heavy. We were dressed pretty good, you know, for the weather. Was there anybody that liked this kind of... No, they all hated it. They all hated it. Oh, yeah. But they were forced to go up there. They had to have some money from a certain part of Sweden. So you stayed in with this stuff for about nine months? No. No, no. I had 140 days to do first. 140? Yeah, and two meetings after that. Two was... 30 days to do after that each year. But, see, I did have 140 days. Then I got a report from the king. I was excused for the day in Sweden for the other two years to get... So then I got what's on, obviously. So he gave you permission not to leave? Yeah. Big paper, you probably seen them. Then I can go, you know. I thought I was going to skip the whole thing. But that was mistaken. I didn't. So you were actually happy then to go to the United States after that trip up the moon? Oh, I changed my mind. But I didn't mind it so much because after I'd been up there, like you said, they helped them, you know, going through the hell. I got home from there, maneuvered, and as I get there, a guy had left a loaf of bread in my bed. He said he didn't want to go to the army. We called him Trötte Theodor på svenska. Tired... Trötte Theodor? Yeah. Where was he from? He was from a part in Sweden, a certain part of Sweden. So he wouldn't get out of it. He said he talked me into get heavy slam doors outside on the outdoor toilets and stuff they had out there, you know. It was all outside? Heavy, yeah. Heavy doors. Oh, yeah. He said to me... He slammed the doors on himself first. Then one of the guys said to me, he said, take the door and give it a good slam. He said, two by four is... You know, I said, I don't want to go through that maneuver, he said. So I said, okay, I'll do it. So I took the door and gave it a slam on the hand, got it ruined. I thought I was going to break it, you know. So I went to the doctor. A couple days before the maneuver. The doctor said, what have you been doing? Oh, I fell, he says, in a hill and hurt my skin. The doctor said, it looks more like a hit to me, he says. Like somebody hit somebody, hit it on something. No, he says. Anyway, he got by with it, stayed home. When I came back, the maneuver, he had a bottle of bread and some cheese and put it on top of my bed. For doing that for him, you know. So he was, he stayed home and did nothing. He did everything up there to get into the house up there. What did you say when you came back to Fjällbacka? The same age group asked you, did you like it? What did you say? To your friends back in Fjällbacka, did you say it was easy? Up there? No, when you came back to Fjällbacka. When you came back to Fjällbacka, what did you say to your friends then? I told them, I told them up there. You said that? Oh yeah, we had one guy up there before in Fjällbacka. He came home with inflammation in the ears and almost died up there. That's only one guy before, been up there. So they was really a hell of a group. Yeah, a hell of a group. Jesus, we've been there, you were a hero. Oh yeah, boy. Did you have any, you didn't get sick though, or frostbites or? I had frostbite on my cheek, oh yeah. And even that one, I got by with that pretty good though. I was on the sick list, you know. Doctors put a patch on it, you know. And I was walking on the hallways in the, what do you call it in the... Lodgementet? Yeah. And the corporal stopped me, what are you in? B, A or B, whatever, yeah, different from, I said B. Okay. They do some light work sometimes, but I... I went to the doctor again, he took the thing, took the thing off, you know. So I said to the doctor, leave it on there, I can take it off myself. That's going to go out today, I'll do it sometime. Okay, he said, pull it off in the morning, he said, I'm going to report to you, all right. Okay, fine. I left around for a week, I think, and got by with it. I walked off with the thing on, you know. And they just saw me in the hall out there, and the corporal stopped me. Still sick list, yeah, I said, yes. Finally he called me, he said, I think it doesn't hurt or anything. The report, so and so, go out and get some... So there was a lot of visits then to the hospital, or... Oh, yeah....to the doctor. Yeah. They tried everything. Oh, yeah, the one guy had a chickenpox, or something like that, they call it røda hund i Sverige? Ja. What do they call it, røda hund? Røda hund, yeah. I know, but it's something they make, what is it like? What is it about, like in this country? English. Is it like chickenpox almost? Chickenpox is... Yeah, they are røda hund. Is it? I believe it is. The one guy got that, wearing my bunk, above me. This contagious, though, yeah. He had to stay in for five or six weeks, you know. I thought, heavens, jesus, I said to him, breathe on me. I rubbed the hand down on me. I slept in his bed, you know. Which I... No, it's not a dark-gun thing. He was really drooling when he went, you know. Hey, goodbye, boys. No, not a dark thing. But one guy, I call it, real bad cold. And he put me in the hospital. I got fever, see. Then they checked me for diabetes. They thought I had diabetes. Eggwitte is... Is it for Swedish? Is it eggwitte? Is it sugarcane? Sugarcane, yes. Diabetes. Sugarcane is in Swedish. So I was so happy, I said, damn, can I get it? I didn't know. So then they checked me again. I was in a real hospital, in a wooden hospital. Beautiful nurses and good food and coffee. You could see like a king, you know. I think I was in there three, four days. The party was over. They said, no, you don't have any diabetes, sugarcane. You're all right now. You can go back. No fever. Oh, Jesus. What a letdown. What a letdown, you know. I said, I hope I can stay there, you know. Did you practice any running now in the evenings, for instance, after the day was over? In Bolen? No, you do not. I had to run up there. It was all snow, you know. Oh, I see. But you didn't do that in the... No, no, I didn't practice any running, except when I had a gymnastics. Gymnastics, you had... I loved that, when I had a strong mouth. Was that once a week or twice a week? Once a week we had gymnastics, I think once a week. So then the lieutenant asked before we started, anyone must run in the group. And I told him that I was, you know. So he said, if you want to run, if you exercise... It was a big gymnastics hall, you know. Gym, big gym. The last thing we did after gymnastics was... Gym was running. They called it sprungmarschen. Sprungmarschen. Then I loved it, but I couldn't go fast enough. The guy didn't go fast enough for me. But then when I got through, I'd go alone and run a few times. That's the only time I practiced, you know, that I came to practice. Were there any other runners that you knew of? No, no. No? No, I think there was any in there. Not in my outfit. No. So there was an experience you had? Yeah, it was an experience, yeah. So there was not too many from Fjällbakken and they asked for Boden after? No, only one guy all the years. Only one guy, yeah. It's nothing. No, they hated that. We had some from Trollhättan. And we had one in Brottare from Borås. And I remember we had one from Gartenburg. We had different... And some from Sweden, you know. Only one guy was up there. He must have had an awfully hard life. This guy, he liked it up there. He did? He was a little, tiny, puny guy. He looked so pale and he said, oh, I don't know, he's a good foodie. And we thought he was, you know, not something wrong. But no, no. He was all right. He must have had an awfully poor company, a poor place or something. So he was able with the skiing and everything? Yeah, he was happy. He didn't mind it. No? But he was one of the few? Yes, he was. Poor, I tell you. He was my same in my outfit, my group. How was the food now? The food wasn't too bad, except the surströmming. Oh, you had to learn to... The surströmming. Oh, they had that? Oh, yeah, we had that. It smelled like... I'm telling you. How often did you have that, though? Oh, I think we had it almost every week, I think. Every week. Did you ever smell surströmming? Yes, yes. We didn't know what that smell was until we came back. I never saw it at home, you know. And we did that and stuff. But it didn't taste as bad as it smelled, you know. But it smelled like a son of a gun. But that was what we hated. But then we had after the flask, you know, pannkakor. For Thursday. Thursday. And it was good. But one time, this is my... Don't think I'm lying, you know. They fried the pancakes in squares. You know? Kind of thick one. Not that thick, about this thick, I would say. I see, about half an inch. Yeah. And sometimes they burned them up so hard, you see. They burned them, they were throwing them. So one guy sitting at our table, he got one, and he took it like this and threw it towards the kitchen, all over the tables. He threw it towards the kitchen. He was a rough one. And he hit one guy sitting by the table here and cut him. It was that hard? Yeah. And cut him with the pancakes, you see. And we all got a penalty. Nobody wanted to tell who threw it. You couldn't squeal in the army. No. So he cut him here. I heard people here bleeding, you know. So when I told this story to somebody else, they think I'm lying. You know, they think I'm lying. When they threw a pancake and cut somebody, it's so hard. But it's the honest truth, it happened. Why did they fry them that hard or overcook them? You know, army cooking. Oh, the kids. You don't give a damn. There wasn't all the way, but you get one on, then you see. This one got one that was all. So you were canned then for about a couple of days? No, we were in Heligot, on the night exercise and stuff. Oh, Jesus. Nobody wanted to tell, you see. You know what table it came from? Close to where we were sitting there, you know, a group. So nobody could tell anything on anybody? No, no, no, no. Then they raised hell with you. They beat you up. Was there a lot of fighting during that time? A lot of fighting? No, it wasn't too bad, no. Not in my outfit. You were able to go off to dances and so on? Oh, yeah. We had a company up there with Swedish Finns. They called them Finn-Pei-Singer. Finn-Pei-Singer. I think they were trained in Finnish language and Swedish language. So they were together with themselves? They belonged to Sweden, you see. But they were part of Finland. You know how they did? They still do, I guess. So they were separated then? Yeah, yeah. They were separate. No one was in with them. But they had knives, they cut, you know. They had string around the knife. And they left the metal on the opening on the blade. So you could just cut, not to kill, but cut, you know. And I guess some of them were in the northern part of Sweden. On the Swedish side, too, were the Älvsbror. Oh, they had Finland? Helsingland. They were known for the knives. Two, I think, they call it. So you got used to them? Yeah, we never saw them get cut or anything, but we hated them. We cut them, you know. Then the Finns were dirty, too. They go to the outside toilet and they smear stuff. They were like pigs, he said, you know. They were not civilized like the... Yeah, not like the Swedes were. And I guess they drank if they got hold of a toilet. And made their own booze and stuff in that part of Finland. So you couldn't take a girlfriend then from that part of... No, but we got by. We had a student company. They were all for neck clothes, they were clean and nice, you know. You had to stay longer than we did, you know. They were reserved, they failed. We called them and took them out for the office training after, you know. But I left there. It was the happiest day of my life, I think. And I left there in Boden. Oh, Jesus. How long did you stay home then in Friedmarka before you left? Not too long, you see. It couldn't have been a month or anything. So your brother, now, what was his name in Chicago? He was in Chicago at that time? Friedolf. Friedolf. Did he send a ticket to you? Yeah. He did? He went in the army in America. He was drafted, you see. With the First World War? Oh, yeah. Second World War. Oh, the Second World War, I see. I was drafted. Two was going to go, but I got six. I didn't have two. When did he leave now from Sweden? A couple of years ahead of you? Yeah, a couple of years ahead of me. Two years ahead, I think. Maybe three years, come out of the army. But he went to... He had a tavern in Chicago on Clark Street for years. A tavern? Yeah, after he got out of the army, he bought a tavern. Before he went in, he bought a tavern on the south side in Chicago. Then when he came back from Sweden, he went to Lake Tahoe. In California? Yeah, and built a house up there. And he ended up down there, 17 years, and lived there. He was building houses. Then he went from there down to Carson City. Nevada? Yeah, Nevada. That's where he died. And his wife still lives in Nevada. Las Vegas, I mean. But now she lives with his son. My nephew lives in Denver, Colorado. He's a head geologist. Do you call him for the oil company? Yeah. He got a big job. He makes $75,000 a year. So he built a new big house and built an apartment for his mother. So he's doing all right. That's my brother's son. And he went to school for eight years, I guess, altogether. He had only one son? He had only one son, yeah. But he didn't live long after he got... Yeah, I guess he lived after he got through school, didn't he? Yeah. Yeah. He died from cancer. He was a sergeant in the army here in this country. And he got a sign up in Rockford Papers about him. He took a group of platoon across the river and didn't lose one man or something, you know. He was... And I guess everybody was after to be in his platoon because he was trained in Sweden, you see. He was a Swedish general corporal in Sweden. He was 15 years old in the army in Sweden, invested. What... He came in, he said, it's supposed to be 17 to be able to go in, enlist in Sweden. And we had a sergeant that lived in Norway, Farn Junkare, lived nearby with us. Retired, was on the reserve or something. And he wrote to the army and said... Göteborg, or... I don't know where he wrote, what he wrote to. He wrote to the one that called... Uddevalla. Maybe, I don't know. I don't know where. And said, this man, this boy is developed like 20 years old. He was, you know, strong and built like a Tarzan in 1915. He's known as a stonecutter too? Boys... Yeah, he's done a little bit, but he enlisted in the army instead. Where did he serve then? He served in Skövde. He was there three years or four years. Three years for the enlistment, I think. He came out when he was 18, I think. Anyway, so he took him in when he was 15, see? He did, they let him come in. So he was that strong then? Yes, that strong and developed and meant to smart too. He had a good head on him. So he got him in there. But the other one went in when he was... He was old enough, he was 17 when he went in. But then, later he got in, so he got to be... He was a Swedish young corporal, I know. How old, how did he like it? In the army? Yeah. Well, he didn't mind so much. He was never in a bowling, you know. Yeah, he was there one month for ski training. He was? Yeah, he didn't mind so much, only for a month, no man over himself, you know. So you had a much worse time, but you were... He was already over here then? Yeah, he was over here, you see. Did you write to him about your experience up there? Oh yeah, oh yeah. He didn't believe you, I suppose? No, he... But you see, he was... Them guys took up there like that, enlisted men, they had it better than we did, you see. You didn't go out on penalties and stuff with it. You trained them up there, you know. They had it better. You had a lot of penalties. Oh yeah, big penalties. So if there were too many rough guys on, they all get penalties? Oh yeah. We better check for... You know, better check it? Yeah. We had a... officer we had in our... Did you get the penalty for that too? Oh sure. He came home with this... He started crawling in... He cursed, he was a scone-ing. Little short guy, we called him Stumpen. And he was a lousy guy, they hated him. So anyway, he... He came in and started... Jävla fan... cursing, couldn't get into the bed, you know. And we started laughing, what dark, you know, we started laughing. And he took us all up. Had to go up and get... Dressed, you know, get all the... We had to go out for two hours, I think I'd gone... 30 below zero. Night penalty march. So he was able to have that power level? Yeah, nobody wanted to tell him who it was. Who did it, you see. And he didn't scream who did it, you know. Because he all took the blame, you know. And the guy did it, he was a farmer's son. I'm going to fix that stone, so he said, you know. Going to build a stack for him, but he got stuck, all of us. Where did the washing go on? You can go and... I got my dryer on. You were not able to save any money then? No, no, no, no, no. How much were you paying off in the army? In the Swiss army? Yeah. We got, I think we got 20 crowns a month. Did you send them home or did you spend... No, no, we used it with cigarettes and stuff, you know. There was spend money for coffee and stuff. There wasn't enough, you know. You were smoking then at that time? I smoked a little bit at the time, yeah, but not... Never in the time I did... Did most of the people... After running I didn't smoke, you know. You didn't smoke then? No. And no drinking? No, no. Did most of your friends smoke or drink during that time? In the army? Yeah. In the army, yeah, but not home where I came from or anything. Not in Fjällbacka, but... So it was not you... You couldn't see too many with cigarettes in their mouth or did they use pipe or snuff? Yeah, the stone cutters used snuff. In the army, you mean? Yeah. In the army, all the smoke, all material was there. They did? If you go out on the... Nobody was using snuff? No, I don't think they did. I won't say for sure, no. Maybe they did. How about the stone cutters now? Were they using snuff? Oh, yeah. Nobody was smoking? No, they... They smoked two of them, but most of them I think used snuff, yeah. But you never started with that? No, no, I never started with that, no. No, if you had a cigarette... When you get paid in the army up there, you bought a packet of cigarettes, I think it was Tiger brand. Brand, they had Tiger... Tiger brand. You rolled... You rolled your own? Rolled cigarettes, you know. You couldn't afford to buy them. Then if you licked one up, lit one up out in the hall, and the guy said, puff on that one, puff on that one, do you want to get... They smoked as long as they could, you know. They left and they come and they want to get a... They get a drag on them, you see. They were just booming like... You couldn't have tobacco with you in a packet when you opened up in the army? You couldn't have? Oh, no. I put mine in the matchbox, 10-ticks box. You had it in there when you opened up? Yes. In there a little bit, otherwise they would... Oh, you'd have been gone in no time. So there was not everybody that bought Tiger brand then? No, they bought, but you see, they ran out right away. They smoked right away, all the time, you know. Then they went and bumped to somebody else. But they were so loosely stuffed, I suppose, that it went down fast.