 This is cassette 3, side 1, continuation with Gene Espling, Rockford, Illinois. Cassette 3, side 1. Before we get into your newest part of your life, being married, if we go back a little bit, I'm wondering how did the parents' viewpoints affect your idea of starting a life on your own as an adult? Were you close to your father, for instance, in your work? Oh yeah. Well, I got a job out there while I was 15 years old. And I got a job at Milling Machine, they call it then, which is no longer there. And my dad worked there and he was a very good teacher. And I was mechanically inclined and all I dreamed about was to get on one of those machines, a lathe, you know, like dad had. And I think if they had told me they wouldn't pay me or they'd let me work at it, I wouldn't get any money. I would have worked at it anyway. So you enjoyed it that much? I enjoyed it that much. And I couldn't hardly wait for the morning to get back to work because I wanted to work on those machines. And the foreman gave me a small machine, call it a baby lathe, which was about three foot long. And he said that he showed me how to operate it. And he said, now, if you run against this stop over here, he says, you'll break a pin in there. And that'll take an hour to get that pin out and get a new one in there. And I'm going to kick you right back where you sit so you'll have to stand up, he says. And there was a lesson you remember. It was no lesson, but it was a theoretical lesson. But I never broke a pin. Some of the boys that worked on those machines, they kept breaking pins all the time and the foreman would be after them. But I never broke a pin. So I was alert to the fact that if I hit that tailstock, or headstock, I should say, I would be in trouble. By going along now in your work, your father, you listened to what he told you and what he taught you. Were there at any point that you knew more than your father, for instance? Did you discuss in between you that you were a little bit ahead of him? I mean, because you were in that school. Oh, no. You mean on the machinery? No, not as far as the lathes were. He was an expert on that. Oh, he was an expert. He was the best man they had. And he made the spindles. They were roughed down from forging by another fellow that did that on a big machine. Then he brought them over to Dad and Dad finished them. And he cut the threads and reamed the hole in there. And that was real tricky because he put a test bar in there, which was two feet long. And they had to stop that indicator out there at the end of that thing, which made it – well, you had to know what you were doing. And a couple of the fellows over there tried, you know, thinking that they were good enough mechanics they could do it. But when they got through, the inspection rejected them. Then they come back to Dad and he had to face off a little on the front so he could get something to work on. And he would true them up so that they stopped the indicator again. So it got so that nobody else would tackle Olsen. I never tackled him. And I know I can remember I was very interested in machines, much very – to the point where I was – I lived it. So there must be a lot of patience involved with that kind of work. Yeah. Was your patience as good as your father's? Yes. Yeah. And he loaned me tools and showed me how to do it. But on those jobs afterwards, I didn't need any help from him. I could handle them myself. And the foreman gave me job after job. And I remember one of the draftsmen over there come down and he looked at me and he says, how can – how does the – Anderson his name was, the foreman – how does he dare let you do those jobs? Well, I guess he knows I can handle it and I did. No problem. And I think it was due to the fact that all I could think about was to do them right. So it went on and I remember on one particular Christmas, Dad was called back in during vacation to make what we called a plunger for the dividing head, which was a small piece and very difficult to make. And so Dad started out. He made some for him so that he had some to work on over the holidays. When he come back, he was going back on his spindles. And the foreman said, now what are we going to do about these? So he says, give them to the kid. He says, that's me, you know, I was the kid. Oh, and Anderson says, do you think he could do it? Well, let him try it. And I can remember I made them and I shined them up, you know, and polished them and they were perfect. And I laid them up in a row like decorations on my bench. And the superintendent come walking by and he stopped and he looked at them and he says, what do you got there? Oh, he says, the plunger for dividing head. He says, are you making those? Yeah. You think they'd be any good? Oh, yes. I've already brought some over to the inspection department and he says, good, keep going. So I finished and then instead of making 50 of them, I think I got 150 to do. And I not only made good ones, but I made money on piecework. And that was all right because I wasn't too far out of line. I think my rate at that time was 22 cents an hour. I had climbed the ladder from 10 to 22. And so the foreman thought I was doing all right, so he said, I gotta give you a job here. I don't know if you can handle this one, but try it. He says, I'll tell you this, it's a job that the boys don't like. They can't make any money on it. We'll see what you can do. So I come up with an idea, if I could change the tooling a little bit, I'd make it work. So he says, do anything you want, that's okay. And so I made all those parts up and got rid of that order and he brought another order and then another order. And then he said, come out, he says, wait a minute, what are you doing here? I says, why? What have I done wrong? Why? He said, have you figured your time on these? No, I says, I haven't paid much attention to that. Why, according to this, he says, your piecework rate is up to 550 an hour. And I says, well, what do we do about that? Well, he says, I want you to keep track of your time. I says, I wasn't interested in that. I was interested in finishing a job. Well, I'll fix it. He says, so, he says, I got another job here just like it that the boys aren't making any money on. So you take that job and take the time from this and add it on to that one. But I made money on that one too. Then I got into real trouble. So now he says, I'm going to take you into the crib and you're going to have to help me clean up the crib, put your time on this job to even it out. Because if I had gone in for 550 an hour, they'd have cut that rate down and it was already so far that nobody wanted it. And I don't know why, except that the shortcuts that I did worked out real good. Well, I got through with that one all right. And he gave me another job that I won't go into the details on that, what's involved. But it was another job that the boys didn't make any money on. So I made a nice job of it and made money on it. But what did you do different then? Well, because there must have been some. Well on that particular job, it was a job where they used a single tool and cut one side of this part and then went back and cut the other. I made a tool that cut both sides and went in there and cut both sides at the same time. Made money on it. So he says, I don't know what I'm going to do with you. Well, I says, just shift the times on some other jobs here. Yeah, he said, I got some of those. We'll get rid of those. So I worked on those until I got rid of all this, what we call scrap jobs out there. And I made money on all of them. And my rate was high so that the boys, older men in the department, complained that I was making too much money. You were working too hard. Yeah, they said, well, I didn't work hard, I just did it in a way that was easier. But you were hard to fit in. You didn't fit in with the management and not with the workers. I mean, you were smoking the wheel. Yeah, well, management liked it all right. But they didn't want to get rid of you as a production worker. They didn't want to make a foreman out of you. No, no. They didn't allow us to go into the field as a worker. No, no. I was too young. I was just a kid. So they were not even considering it. No, no. So I did that to several of the jobs. And the foreman was very pleased with it. When every once in a while he'd come out and check my time and say, well, I'll allow you to make $3 an hour, which was high money then, you know. It sounds outrageous. Oh, yeah. Well, I was getting 22 cents. And to go up to $3, that was pretty good, you know. How could they do that without other workers, co-workers knowing about it? Then they didn't feel bad that they were in there making $3 an hour. Well, sure. I won't mention the fellow's name. He was much too slow. And he couldn't make money on them. He really dallyed around too much, you know. But they complained to the foreman several times. He finally told them, he says, well, if you can do the job, go ahead and I'll give you the job and you can make. Now they could turn in $4.25 an hour on piecework. That was all right. But I couldn't make more than $3 because I was just a kid, you know. And there was no union involved at that time? No, no union, no. So finally, one day by Christmas, the foreman come in, or the superintendent, and pin up a notice on the clock that no more raises would be given under any consideration because the company is having a hard time meeting payrolls and so on and so on. So well, I stopped him one morning. I said, Mr. Sedalev, I'd like to talk to you. Sure. What do you want? I see the notice on the clock over there. Does that include me? And he says, well, everybody, I don't think we're going to give any raises for anybody anymore now until we get over this slow spot. Well, then I says, I guess I'll move on then because I'm only getting $0.22 an hour a day rate and if I don't have piece work, I have to back up to $0.22 an hour and if I have to stay there for any length of time, then I don't want to live with that. So I'll turn in my time then in a couple of weeks and move on. Did you tell the foreman? The superintendent. The superintendent. Yeah. Oh, no, he says, you can't do that. I'll talk to the foreman. He says, well, we'll see what we can do. No, I don't want you to leave. He says, you're all right. We like you and all that. Then they decided the foreman in the tool room wanted a good lathe hand in there who could handle most everything. So he says to the foreman down there, Anderson, he says, I need one. Who can I have? He says, you can have the kid. Oh, Brewer says he was the brother to the serial. I don't want no kid. I want a man that can handle this. How old were you then when they used this expression? 22? Oh, no. I was about 17, I think. 17. There was a kid factor that came in. Oh, I was still a kid, you know. And I act like a kid and look like a kid, I guess. So the foreman, well, he says, I'll take him and try him. So he gave me jobs up there and I handled them real good. Now it maybe sounds like boasting, but this is the truth. This is the way it handled. So one day I thought I had worked up there quite a while. I don't know what, six, eight months, I think, in the tool room. Had to handle that job all right. So I stopped to see the relief again, the superintendent, and says, I'm not happy with what I'm doing. I feel that I'm in a rut. Well he says, what do you want to do? Well, I'd like to be moved around the plant to different jobs so I can learn any job in the plant. I'd like to be so good that if a man gets sick or goes on vacation for two weeks or more or something like that and he's got a job on a machine, it has to be finished, come over and get me, I'll go down and finish it. He stood there a while and looked at me and said, that's a pretty big order. Well I said, if you don't think I've got the ability, we'll forget about it, but that's what I'd like to do. Well, we'll try something, he said. It didn't take long, about a week later the foreman come over from the tool room and told me, he says, I understand you talked to my brother. He called his superintendent, his brother. So I says, yes. What kind of expression is that? Swedish, you know, he was Swedish, see. And he says, you're going to be, Monday morning you'll be moved down on a planer. Okay, fine, I'll take anything. I did real well on that job and Ekstrom, the foreman in that tool room, or the planer, said boy, you handle these real good. You're interested and you take care of it and you do a good job. So then the foreman recommended that I go to another department for another set of machines. So I went over there. His name was Flutie. And I worked with him and then back on the planer. But they put me back on special jobs on that planer time and time and again. And he gave me jobs that the foreman said, Ekstrom said, I don't know if I should put you on these jobs because we only have one. You wreck it, we're done. I says, I won't, confidential. I got the jobs done and did a good job. I remember I had to make some long shims that went into the, we called them gibs, for the machines. They were to be plain. They were six foot long, some of them down to three foot long for the tables. And the foreman said to me, he says, now, he says, be sure that when you turn these over often enough so that they don't buckle on you. They won't buckle. I'll fix that. Well, I fixed them. And the foreman, I can't remember his name now, who did the scraping, he come over and he says, that's the best job I've had yet is scraping. The other guys leave up to a sixteenth of an inch because they're so crooked. And you only left about fifteen, twenty thousand, he says, and they were so straight. How did you do it? I says, I just did it right. That's all. I pinned them down right, you know, and didn't spring them. So it's hard to explain what I did unless you go into the actual working of it, you know. In a sense, did I have, I suppose, a feel for the work. There's no question about it. Every work gotta have a feel to it. But you all had the same kind of instrumentation to go by. Why were the other people so careless of getting into the tolerances they was called for? Well, I don't know. I still say I had a special talent for picking up when it come machinery. And again I say if they had told me I had to work for nothing I would have. Actually I know I would have. So there was no strain for you then to pick up a piece of work you knew exactly what to do and if you had difficulties you could swing it? Yeah. Other people were supposed to get careless. Yeah, they get careless and they don't think, you know. You gotta think up ahead what'll happen when you do things. It's too late when it's over. Yeah. I've done these gibs, now they were fastened down with pins from the sides and so forth. And if you didn't shim those right the pin would pull this thing down. And when you released it it bowed because it had pressure on it, see? Even a thick piece. Pardon? Even a thick piece would... Yeah. Yeah. So he was very pleased so he gave me several of those to do. And he says, you did a nice job so we'll let you do some more of those. Well then one day I talked to the foreman again and I says, or superintendent, I says, well I've gone as far as I can go on that planer now I think I'd like to try something else. Well, he says, how would you like to go over to Sunstrand adding machine? I says, I'd like that. Maybe I can get you in over there in the tool room. So I says, that I laid awake. I couldn't wait for that one, you know. Seems strange that I should be so interested in it. But anyway they sent me over there. George Johnson was the employment man, took me over there and introduced me to Axel Guson, and was in charge of the department there. And told them that I would have to start up in this motor drive department and later graduate into the tool room. But they liked me so well and we got along so well that they didn't want to let me go. And I remember one time the machine went on the fritz up there and they took it down and Anderson, or Axel Guson was sitting there tapping his pencil and talking to himself a little bit. He happened to come over there and overhear them when they were talking about this job. And he says, you know, he says, here we are in slack times and his machine's standing empty and I can't get a man for three weeks in the tool company. Rockford Tool was a division of it. They said they could handle the job, but the man that could do it, it'd be three weeks before he could do it. So I says, well, what's the problem? Oh, he says, we gotta set this twisted thing up on the machine and straighten it out and if we could take a smooth cut on there and straighten it out and bring it down to a level. So it's, I'd like to have it like new, he says. And I looked at him and I says, well, I'll do that for you. And he looked at me and he says, what do you mean you'll do it? Oh yeah, I says, I've got, I've had experience on a planer. So I says, you can check with Flutie over there at the milling department because he was boss over the planers also. So he says, I'll check with him. Come back, he says, all right, I'd like that. But we said, we have to go down and talk to the foreman down there. They had a half a dozen planers standing, you know, idle, but nobody to run them because they laid off everybody, you know, in that department. But the adding machine, where they made the adding machine was going good. That was the department I was connected with. So the foreman looked at me and I come around and he says, are you going to run this machine? Show me how you, the machine was empty. And he says, start it up and run that table back and forth. So I did and he says, now back it up and stop it right here. And you did it with a lever. So your one belt pulled forward, the other one was in reverse. So to stop it, you switched over and hit the reverse belt just right and it would stop right like that. He did that a couple times. He said, well, I think maybe I can trust you, but I'll be watching you, he said. I says, okay. So I pinned the job down and when I say pin, that's how we held it. And I put stops in the front and back so it shouldn't shift. And he says, he come over and he says, well, he says, I think you know what you're doing. I'll let you go ahead. So go ahead. And a couple of hours I had that done, I walked over to him and I says, well, I'm through. I'll come over and look at it. And he did. All right, I'll call Gustafson and tell him that you can bring the job up. You're through. Brought the job up and he said, gee, he says, that's very fortunate that you know how to do that. He said, you know, they wanted three weeks wait. He said, I couldn't have that machine down for three weeks. Well, he says, you didn't have to. You got it overnight. How's that? So he says, well, he looked at it and put it on, fitted the part in there and says, it looks real good. OK, fine. I'll remember that. So that was one of the experiences I'll never forget. So you were not afraid to tackle the job? No, oh no, I'd tackle anything. And I figured out ways to handle it. And I think there was a special something that I had because I loved machinery so much. You were not beside or among a lot of Swedish immigrants that came from Sweden in the 20s and also some of the old timers that were there, they have families there and they were still greenhorn when it comes to the language. I mean, you had no trouble with the English language. You could handle it because you were brought up in it here. What was the difference now for the Swedish guy that came with no knowledge of the language? Was he more afraid, you think, to handle jobs like you did? Well, not if they were experienced in that kind of machinery. The language wasn't anything. It wasn't? No. And if they needed any help with the language, I could do that, you know. But in a way, didn't you notice that the Swedes were a little bit reluctant to put a foot forward in any job? I mean, did they come forward and say, I know how to do this, sure, I will drive it up here? Yeah. Were they afraid to do that or to take action? Well, the one man, I'll never forget that on the planer, he said he could do it. They had a special job, which they were doing for an outside company that was in the shape of a box with no top and no bottom. And they had to shape that across. And so they gave it to this man. He said, oh, I can handle that. And he pinned it down and I watched him and I thought, boy, this doesn't look good to me, but it's none of my business, I guess. But he would fool around there. And then finally he got started and there was only a one of a kind on these, you know. So what happened was they popped loose and he wrecked every one on that whole load on the planer. The pieces just flew all over. And I can't understand that they didn't can him because of what he did, the damage he did, because they had to go back to the foundry and have him make some more parts of these. But I said to Flutie, I said, well, I didn't think it was going to work because he wasn't doing it properly. And I figured if one of those got loose, that would wreck the whole thing and that's just what it did. But I couldn't go over and felt like I could go to the foreman and tell him. I didn't feel I should, see. It was like squealing then. Yeah. So I kept watching him. But it happened so fast when they popped loose. It was nothing to it. It just busted them all, broke them all. You weren't afraid of the step forward and told the management that you needed more increase of pay if you felt it? I never asked for a raise. You never asked for a raise? Never asked for a raise. Never. Why nobody asked for any raise if they felt they were doing a good job? Or they were accustomed to just keep working? Yeah, well, there were some that weren't worth what they were getting, were always pushing for more money. But I was afraid of one thing, that if he paid me more money, they would expect probably – I didn't think about that. I didn't think about that. Then you had the leverage on them. I didn't – I don't know. I was just happy I was doing a good job. That's all. So then they decided to send me over to adding machine. Like I say, I was introduced to the man in the motor drive department. And he asked me, he said, Axel Gustafson said, are you pretty good on a lathe and milling machine and that? And he says, I says, yeah, I think I am. I can handle anything you got up here. He says, do you think you can handle any of these things that we got up here? I says, yes, I think so. And I – well, he says, I got a job here, some racks we got to make for the money machines for the carrier. He says, you got a jig here, set them up and cut that groove from one end to the other according to the print. So I did and I thought, boy, this doesn't work. This thing is made backwards. So I thought, well, I'll just run the cutter backwards. And if I'm real careful, I can do that. But mostly when you run the cutter backwards, if you put too much pressure on it, it would loosen up and stop and then it would break the cutter. So Axel Gustafson come over and – no, the fellow that did the drawing of the fixture come over and looked at me and he says – went over to Gustafson and he says, have you noticed what that kid's doing over there? Where is he from and where did he learn to run a milling machine? He's running it backwards. So he says, I haven't noticed that. I said, let's go over and talk to him. So I was standing there feeding this thing slowly, you know. And finally the foreman said, do you know you're running that cutter backwards? Yes, I do. Why are you doing that? Because the fixture is made backwards. I says, how could I? If you can tell me how I could run the cutter the right way with this fixture, I'll change it, but I can't. Engineer looked at it for a while and he says, yeah, I guess he's right. He took off. So Gustafson says, well, if you can make it work that way, it's fine. And then tell him to change this fixture, I'll tell you what to do. And if you have to make more of them, we can change this around so you can run it right. So the foreman come over to me afterwards. He says, boy, that hurt for him to come over and admit that they had made a mistake. He says, so, he says, you know, you're doing a good job. I'm going to recommend that you get a race, big fat race, you know, two cents an hour. I said, thank you. And so then when George Johnson, the employment man, come over there and talk to Gustafson, he says, how's the kid doing? Oh, he's doing a good job, but he isn't satisfied. He wants to get in the tool room. So he said, well, all right, we'll see if I can get him in there. Well then Walt Johnson, who had charge of the experimental department, where they experimented with new ways and improvements for the animation, he says, I want him in there. He says, I've been watching him and I want him in there to do my work. So he come out and he says, wouldn't you consider going in there instead of the tool room? And I said, no, I don't want that. I said, I want to go to the tool room. I want to make dyes. So if I can't have it here, I'll go someplace where I can. He says, you mean you'd quit? I said, sure, quit and go over to National Locker someplace and they'd give me dye work, he says, if I think I could handle it. So he said, well, we'll see what we can do. So he brought the man up from the tool room, Maynard Johnson, and introduced him to me and he says, this guy, he wants to go back, he wants to go to the tool room. He wants to make dyes. He don't want to monkey with this stuff anymore. Well, Maynard says, if he can handle it, why, that's fine. I'll let him do the machine work down there and so forth until he can handle it, as we can see he can handle it. So they transferred me down there. And I might inject something here that happened up in the motor drive that I thought was kind of interesting. He had a fellow working up there by the name of Peterson. I can't remember his first name. And they had some parts, brass parts, that had to be bored, reamed, and turned. And he made a mess of the job. And the foreman come over there and looked at him a couple times and the guy didn't come to work Monday morning. He didn't come to work for a week. He didn't come to work for two weeks. So those days, the foreman would go out and – or John Johnson did the employment and see what was wrong. It was in the 1920s. Yeah. So he went over there to see him and he was sick. Mother says, I can't get him out of bed. And so finally, after about two weeks, well, the foreman then asked me if I'd go down there and take a look at those parts. So I did. He said, then you can go down to the tool room after. You'll be transferred down there. So I says, I'll go in there and look. He had some parts that were – he hadn't started yet. So I finished those first on the lathe. Then I started on the others. And I says to Gustafson, I says, I can't salvage some of these because they're too far gone. But I'll salvage what I can and then you'll have to get some more parts. So he looked at them and he says, that is a mess, isn't it? Yeah. And then I – he lived – this Peterson lived on Broadway up to a little – by a little store up there. And that's where the boys would congregate at night, you know, and swap stories and so forth. Nice gang, though. There wasn't any vulgarity or anything like that. And Mr. Peterson come down there and he says, yeah, I don't feel good. How are things going over at the plant? Oh, I'm fine, he says. I said, nothing wrong. Why? Well, he says, just between you and I, how – I got to go back and finish those pieces, he says. Oh, I says, they're done long time ago. I took care of those, finished them off. I said, I didn't tell him that I scrapped half of them because I couldn't salvage them. He says, are they done? I says, yeah. He come to work the next day. And he told me, he says, I was afraid to come to work because I knew I had spoiled them, he says, and I didn't know what to do. He come back to work and I had finished them all off. And I says, yeah, you don't have to worry about that. He says, I took care of them. So there was a sickness? Yeah. He was scared, too? That happened once more at another plant I worked, too. Well, I'll tell you about that. Well, I could tell you now. It was with alcohol. I moved over into – let's see now. I got to think a little bit. Well, anyway, I'll probably digress a little later. But anyway, this fellow's telling me, he says, you know, I hired out as a machinist here. I could handle anything. But he says, they told me to go repair a drill press down there. And he says it had gears in it. So I took it apart and the foreman said, when – make a couple of gears just like the old ones here with the teeth knocked out of them, you know. So he says, you know, he says, I didn't know how to set up a dividing head and cut any gears. So he says, I just stayed home for the next two, three days. He says, and each day I'd check and find out if the – so after a week, I figured I have to go back to work. So he thought, I'll have to face the music. So I come back and lo and behold, that machine was still down and nothing had been done. So he says, the foreman come over, he says, well, I'll tell you, he says, you got it all apart. He says, take those gears over to the maintenance department there and he'll make a couple of gears for you. And he says, here, I stayed home for a whole week. I didn't dare face the music. So he says, boy, that was a load off of my mind. The rest I could do, he says. So I went over there and had them make the gears. And when they got them done, I put them in there and put the machine together and it was okay. Here, I thought all the while, I'd have to do it. And I didn't know the first thing about it. So being all around machinists, that was not easy, I mean, to cut gears and the plate. No, no. And everything like that. No. But I remember when I applied for a job over at Elko, because it was close to home and I thought I'd go in there and try for a job in there. So I went in and I told the girl, it was Rose was her name. She interviewed everybody that come in there and says, could I help you? And I said, yeah, I'm looking for work. I don't think we have any. We don't need anybody, she says. Oh, I says, I think you do. And she says, what do you mean? Well, you must have machines around here that need somebody to operate. He says, she said, well, I'll let you talk to Mr. Broberg. So Mr. Broberg got on the phone and she says, what does he want? Well, he wants to make, he says he wants a job in a tool room. How much experience has he got? So Rose says, how much experience have you got? Just tell him enough. And he thought that was, enough, he says. How much is that? I'll come down and talk to him. So he come down and talked to me and he says, you come up to my office. He had a little office about the size of this room here. And he said, so you got enough, huh? Yeah, so he said, I'll tell you, he says, I'll get, I'll, I remember he called John Johnson, that's the foreman in the tool room. And he says, he'll check you out. But what he did, he sent me in the shop with him while he called over to my former employer to find out if I had quit. At those days, you couldn't quit a job and get another job unless you had quit. They checked back. So the management, they were all united? Oh, yes. And if you hadn't quit, they wouldn't talk to you. So he says, yes, he has quit. And he says to John, he says, he's a good man. And if you can get him, better latch on to him, he said. So he took me up to his office and talked a little while. I think I asked him for, I think I says, I was getting 38 cents an hour or something like that, real big money, you know. I says, and I'd like to get about 40 cents an hour. Well, he says, if you're worth it, he says, well, I think we could get an agreement on that. So he says, we'll go out and talk to John, the foreman, again. And while he was doing that, he checked back again to National Lock and then he come back in and he says, yeah. No, he says, yes. He says, I think we can get together. I think I can give you 40 cents an hour and if you can handle this job. Now those big long dyes, you know, a lot of work on them. I says, that's what I want. So we went through the tool room and I says, oh, you got a brand new Warner Swayze in there. He says, what do you know about a Warner Swayze? Oh, I know, I know enough to. So I know how to run one and I set the jobs and I know the machine when I see it. You mean you can handle that? And he says, yeah. Then I want to hire you for that job. And so I said, no, I'm not interested in Warner Swayze. Well, I won't give you any other job. You have to take that job. I says, then I won't talk to you anymore. I says, I don't want a Warner Swayze. What did you have against that machine? Well, it was going backwards, you know, I wanted to make tools. I did not want to run a production machine. Well, there was a door you were standing over. Yeah, down backwards, see? So well, he says, but you sure you know how to run it? Sure. Could you train somebody else to run it? Yes, just as long as I don't have to run it, I says. I can show you how to set it up and do that. And the jobs they had were very simple, so they got a man. I helped them get started and so forth and showed them how to change jobs and that and activate the levers and so forth. So the foreman says, that's pretty good. He says, we've been trying to hire somebody for that, but we couldn't find anybody that was good enough to do it, which I didn't feel was anything, no problem at all, you know. So then he had another job he wanted me to look at. And you know, the girl told me they didn't need anybody. When I got through talking to Broberg, the superintendent, he had three jobs that he wanted me to take, and I didn't want either one of them. I wanted the tool room, making dice. And this was at Elko? Yeah. And there was also a Swedish founded company, or was it All-American? Oh no, there was Swedes in there too, you know. As owners? Yeah. And so was Broberg and his brother Elmer, the engineer, they were Swedes, you know. But there was no problem. If they got a guy in there that couldn't understand English, I'd help him out. Because I was very fluent in both the English and the Swedish, so I had no problem with that. If you go back a little bit now, coming home now, you go over to supper and dinner table, your mother, what role did she play? Because she understood all this jazz about tooling and stuff like that. I never talked about it. You never talked about it? No. No shop talk around the dinner table? No. Uh-uh. And my dad and I, we – well, I remember when I threatened to quit over there at Milling Machine, he told the foreman, he says, well, I guess you're going to lose the good lathe hand over there. He's going to quit. But he didn't oppose your decision? He didn't oppose it, no. And oh, he said, Anderson says, I can't let that happen. So then he got together with the superintendent and they decided that they would raise my rate. I could make $350 an hour I could turn in. And then I – but the other older men were still jealous because – well, the foreman told them, if you want the job, go ahead. Otherwise, I give it to the kid. So that's what happened. And he decided they raise the – not my rate wasn't changed. That was 22 cents still, you know. And I was probably due for a two-cent raise in another month or so. So I would get 24 cents an hour instead of 22. But they raised my – the amount that I could turn in to three and a half. And that was pretty good, you know. And I remember one time I had so much piecework piled up that when I got my paycheck, I didn't believe it myself, $97. Wow, that was – I had a fortune in my hands. For how long time then? Well, that had been for extra. This was for piecework. And it amounted to – it happened to come on one payday, so it was – well, it was over probably two, three weeks. But the normal pay would have been – my paycheck was – I don't remember what it was. But I had gotten to 24 cents an hour, and I had now – I was now 16 years of age, so I could work more than eight hours. I could work nine hours. So 16, there was a difference between more than – Yeah. Well, I wasn't supposed to be working on a machine. And I worked there on 15, when I was 15, see? But – You had to lie about your age a little bit, then. No. But they still gave you – Oh, I just told the foreman, I said, when I was 15 – how I got in there, I got in around a vacation, see? And they gave me – but they says when school starts again, you'll have to quit. But when school started, I didn't quit. I stayed on, see? And the foreman says, well, what are we going to do about that? I said, let's just forget about it. And we did. And I was 16 in November, so they thought that's close enough. We'll see if we get by. So they never bothered me. The school board didn't bother me, and they let me work on. And then when I got to be 16, then it was all right for me to quit school, see? I didn't want school. I didn't want that. I don't know. I wish I had, though, but it would have been nice if I could have got into some – like engineering of some type, you know. It would have been nice. Was you able to follow the blueprints, though? No problem, no problem. No problems? Yeah. You learned it from scratch then, from the beginning? Yeah, yeah. You were talking about the paycheck, you know. You received your payment in cash, though, in an envelope, or how was it done? No, no. It was a check? No, it was a check, yeah. So you went to the bank, then, to – I didn't. I guess I was made out of some different stuff, because when – my first paychecks were $9 for two weeks, and when I got my paycheck, I went over and gave it to my mother. So she was a treasurer? Yeah. And I didn't even get no spending money or anything. I just – You didn't ask for any? No, no. I'll put this back on. I fell on this. No, I didn't ask for anything. What did you do then, during your spare time, for instance, to get your paycheck? I didn't ask for anything. I just went to the bank. I went to the bank. I got my paycheck. I went to the bank. I went to the bank. I got my paycheck. I went to the bank. I went to the bank. And you were there on Saturdays, Saturday evenings, and Sundays. Did you chum around with any specific family? Oh, I – no. The kids I grew up with, I chummed around with them. Were they all in the Swedish background, the kids? No, they didn't speak Swedish, any of them. But they could. But they were from Sweden? Yeah, they could, but they didn't speak Swedish at home. But we did speak Swedish at homes. Mother and dad did, and so I got extra Swedish there. Did you have any Italian or Irish or Polish, Lithuanian boyfriends that you met through school, for instance? No. No. No, I think that the school I went to up there was pretty much either – well, they were offshoot from Swedish families, so there weren't any Italians or that in that school. What about the car now? What age were you then when you got your first car here? I think you mentioned it before, but I can't remember. Well, the first car we bought was an Overland. It was your father that – Yeah, dad bought that. And you learned to drive immediately? No, not immediately. But he wouldn't trust me with that, you know. I was 16, but he says, when you can get to handle it so I think you can, I'll let you try it. And he finally let me have it. And then afterwards, he let me take it on my own, you know, and that was fine. Only that old clunker, you know, if he even saw an incline of a hill, I'd have to shift it a second and then lower to get over the top. It was a punk, punk, punk, you know, Overland clumsy. So then finally, I don't know how it was, but I got dad to go down and trade it in. So let's go down and trade it in for – and I'll help pay for it. The used car agency downtown, cutting used car. And he took a look at the Overland and he says, I can't give you much for that thing, he says. But I got a car here, he says, that I think you'd like to have. It's a Jeffrey, six-cylinder. A Jeffrey, it was a forerunner of Nash, and after Nash, it's the American car today. So it was a car that, well, it was nice looking and all that. I mean, it was – I thought it was. Did you have any to do with what kind of style or kind of car you were going to buy, or was it a salesman who was pointing out this one and it looked good and you bought it? Or did it – What do you mean, in the car? Yeah, in other words, did you have any thoughts in your head, you know, to look for something specific that you'd like to have in the car? No, I wanted to get rid of the old Overland. And I thought this car here had a lot of possibilities. So the first thing I did after we got the thing, well, I had a Ford Coupe, finally. I got a Ford Coupe, a 1920 model, and I got rid of that. And then Dad says, well, he says, you can take over the Jeffrey. He says, so if you want to finish making the payments on that, you can have it, he says, and we'll use it together, but it'll be your car. So this Jeffrey, was it more like a luxury model compared to the Ford? More expensive? More – Jeffrey. Expensive? Yeah, than compared to Ford. To operate, you mean? Yeah, and to buy. Well, yes, this one, they didn't make the Jeffrey anymore, see, so the price wasn't too bad. And first thing I did after I got it, I had quit my job out there, or I got laid off. They laid everybody off. One Christmas, they closed the plant down. It was Alco? No. No, this was – I had gone to National Lock in the meantime, and let's see, how was that now? Well anyway, I don't remember, just I'd have to think a little bit, but I think what I did, I told Dad, I says, he had built a garage up there in Rockview, a single garage, a small one, but it had a dirt floor in there. So I told him, I said, Dad, I says, I'm going to spruce that car up. So I'm going to paint it and so forth and fix it all up. So I had a wire wheel, spoke wheels, wire wheels. It was quite a nice looking car when you got it painted. So I took the wheels off, removed the paint on them, and painted them yellow cream. And the body itself, I think I gave it five coats of paint, and that was done because at that time the enamels and that were not in too much strength, I guess. It didn't stand the sun and so they faded and all that. But I had heard from an old friend of mine, a painter, that if you wanted a good job, you'd have to prime it and fill it, prime it and fill it, fill all the cracks and all that, and polish it down and make it smooth. And then you had to put a prime coat on there and then I would have to get blue because I wanted blue, Packard blue. So I went down to the paint store on 7th Street, and I think it's Lundstrom and Peterson now, it was in that area, and I went in there and asked for Packard blue. And the fellow says, that's kind of expensive, are you sure you know how to handle that? I'll find out how to handle it, I says, I want Packard blue and then I'm going to give it a coat of spar varnish afterwards to stand the weather. Okay. So then I said I wanted a badge.