 Carl Gunnar Jansson, Moline. You live in Moline, Illinois, right? In Davenport? At the Masonic Home in Bettendorf. In Bettendorf, I see. He was born 1897, 27th of December in Bloomington, Illinois. Yeah. And we have 24th of April, 1986. So can you tell me a little bit about your parents before they came to this country? Do you know where they were living? Yeah. Mom came from Edsby in southern Sweden. No, not Erzegmunt. In Helsingland. Oh, yeah, Helsingland. And Pop came from southern Sweden in Nyby. Vestigebrand. Vestigebrand. The southern province, anyhow. And Pop came, I think, Mom came about 1894, thereabouts. And Pop came about the same time. And he was playing in the church and Mom was singing in the choir. That's where they met, in the Swedish Lutheran Church in Bloomington. And Pop worked in the coal mine as a coal miner at first. But after a while, he got so he could take over the weighing of the miners' coal. They got paid so much per ton that they mined. And he took that over and had that job up until he quit and died. Died and quit, rather. And what year did he die? Do you remember? In about 1917. 1917. He had been ill. He was quite a bit older than his parents. Quite a bit older than Mom. And he came, as I said, from southern Sweden in Nyby. And Mom came from Edsby in northern Sweden, the province of Helsingland. Did they talk anything about their home back in Sweden? Oh, they talked about it constantly, yeah. They did? They talked about it. I think they were lonesome and hungry to go back to Sweden as a visit. They didn't want to live there, but to go back and visit, they did. And Pop died, but I got my mother back after I became financially able. And we took Mom and my daughters with us. Dad, no. Grandma did not go, Dad. You just took we three girls. Oh. Grandma was gone. Grandma had died then, huh? Yes. You tell him now about Grandma's early years from when she was young, real young. In Sweden. In Sweden. I don't know much about her in Sweden. Oh, well, we do. She was an illegitimate child, although the pastor that we talked to at her church, what was the name of the church that Grandma went to in that little town next? Ulvernåker. Ulvernåker. Ulvernåker, yeah. Ulvernåker Church. The pastor there, I visited twice, she's visited twice, and you, she, once up there in Edsby. And he got out all the records, of course, the pastor did for Dad, going back 400 years. And when we were there in 1980, he didn't get them out then, but we went and visited the farm that my grandparents, my ancestors had been on 400 years ago. What was the name of that farm, Dad? Beatra. Beatra. Beatra. B-E-A-T-R-A, Beatra. Been in the family since 15, went back to the 1500s. But my grandmother led a very difficult life at seven, wasn't it, when her mother put her out to work at seven? Yeah, she went out there. And she went to work for some people by the name of Lundin. Lundin, yeah. At seven, Grandma went to the mountains to herd goats. And then after a few years of herding goats, she got to make cheese. And at the age of 12, she went to work for the thieves. Oh, oh. Lundin. Yeah, Lundin. They had a store, and they have a lovely home there. The home is still standing, and we have seen it several times. My dad has visited at the home on one of his trips. He's been there, I think, three times. I think I've been more than that, only. No, three times. Anyway, when she was young, she used to tell about how she would have to go out and hang diapers and wash diapers outside with icicles hanging from her arms, believe it or not. And, of course, you know how they scrub those floors. She would have to go to the store at night and scrub the floors after the store was closed. Now, the store, it's just absolutely miraculous. We went to the museum at Edsbean, which is fairly new. Have you been there? No, I haven't been there. Well, it's small, but we thought it was marvelous. And do you know they have part of the store in this museum? And, of course, that was a great thrill to us because they had, like, cash registers and different— they had a little set up of the store. Yeah, like it had been. Yes, like it had been. And, anyway, Grandma told about how she used to walk to school. Her school is still there, and we were through the school. And she told about how the wolves would— there was a forest across from where her house stood and still is a forest, and how she could hear the howling of the wolves when she would walk to school. Wouldn't that be frightening for a child? Terrible. My grandmother was—how long did she go to school, Dad? About through eighth grade. But we think she must have been a highly intelligent woman because when she—even up until the last three years of her life, she lived to be 94, she could name the countries by their new names, you know, Iran for Persia and different things. She could—Persia. Yeah, I think it was, wasn't it? Iran. Well, I'm not sure. Anyway, she would read the National Geographic. She would stay up to see the nightly news. She was really a highly intelligent woman. She worked like a dog all of her life until her later years, thank God. So you remember her very vividly, then? Very vividly, yes. Our children. The one in Bloomington. Yes. Well, she lived in South Dakota then. Her husband died, and my dad went into the Army. His brother graduated from the University of Illinois, and another brother took off, and they were all quite successful. There were three boys. Three boys. And one died at about a year— The fourth boy died. —a few months of age. Carl Gunnar Gustav Adolf and Thurid Valdemar. Three boys. Three boys. The other boy's name was Wilhelm. The fourth boy who died as a baby was Wilhelm. But Grandma loved Bloomington, and they bought a little home that's still standing. And Grandma went to work in Bloomington. Well, the early years I— Worked at Wards. We were pretty covered, but Grandma went to work for a wealthy family in Bloomington named Wards, and they owned the coal mine, didn't they, Dad? Was it the coal mine? I think so, wasn't it? I'm trying to think about that. Well, anyway, she learned—she worked as assistant cook, and she learned to cook and to serve, and she always could do things beautifully, set a beautiful table and like beautiful things. Well, the people she worked for were high-toned people that had money and they had fine things. And the people in Sweden that she worked for, these Lundens, didn't they see that Grandma went to school or— Lundens. Lundens. Grandma first started working like outside in the barns, and eventually the cook at Lundens liked Grandma and took her in to their home, and then she began to help in the kitchen instead of working out in the barns and milking the cows and doing the laundry. And Grandma's sister also worked for Lundens, and she was the nursemaid to the children. Her name was Emma. But she came to this country to visit once or twice, Dad. And Emma? Two or three times. She was here, it seemed, like every other year. No, no, she came, I think, twice. Yeah, I think she did. But both times she got too homesick for Sweden and went home. But the reason Grandma went to Bloomington was because she had relatives there from Sweden who had been to Bloomington before she came over. Thanks. Yeah. So then she went to Santa Cora, you said. Why did she– Well, she had met a man, she had dated a man– That was after your dad married her? No, she had met this man before she married the first time, and we wished that she had really married him because he was a marvelous man. His name was– Gustaf Adolf Olsen. Olsen, a Swede from Sweden, southern Sweden. Skåne. Skåne. He lived very close to–oh, the town right across from– Helsingborg? Helsingborg. He was raised on a farm there in Helsingborg, but he as a child was more or less farmed out as a farmhand, as a very young child, and he lived on a wealthy farm and did not seem to live with his parents. But he's really the only grandfather we knew. I see. The other grandfathers– Did she marry him then? Well, after her husband died, a few years after her husband died, she married this man, Grandpa Olsen. Was he down in Bloomington also? No, in South Dakota, Ethan– Gustaf Adolf Olsen. Yes. He was about, oh, what, six miles from Ethan, which is near Mitchell, South Dakota. How did they have a connection with each other? Did he– She met him in Bloomington. He was a Bloomington man. At the church, I think. And she had dated him a little before she married her husband. And then when he found out that Grandma was widowed, he went back. Yeah, he was widowed also. Yes, they were both widowed. So he had a farm there in South Dakota? Yes. Before that, wasn't he superintendent of the coal mine? Wasn't Grandpa Olsen superintendent? No, he was not superintendent, no. And he worked in the coal mine? He probably worked in the coal mine to get enough money to buy the farm. But anyway, she was very happy with him, much happier with him than with her first husband. Gosh, he used to sit out– Who wasn't. Sit out at night. Was Grandpa Olsen's first wife from Bloomington? No, she was from Sweden, too, I think. But I mean– Oh, yeah, they lived in Bloomington. Sure did. His first wife lived in Bloomington. Yeah, just about a block west of where we lived, where Grandpa Olsen later lived. That's where they lived. It's a long way to get land. Her name was Mary. Mary? Anyway, Grandpa Olsen and Grandma were very happy, and they spent their evenings singing. Singing, they spoke Swedish most of the time. By themselves, I imagine they spoke Swedish all the time. So she went up to South Dakota on the farm, right? Yes, yes, right. They used to walk from church with– she'd have a hold of his arm, and they seemed so happy. Yeah, that was when they came back here, Dad, to Davenport. So how long did they stay then in South Dakota together? Oh, 25 years. 25 years. A long time, yeah. And then Dad bought the farm because it just got to be too much. You know, that farm had no electricity, no running water. And Grandma– my grandmother never did like the farm, did she, Dad? No, she didn't. So did you go out there to visit them? All the time, every summer. Every year for 19 years, we spent five weeks up there. That was your vacation then. That was our vacation. We were a very close family. And Grandma, as I said, died in 1994. And she died in, what year? 1969. 1969. So you see, we were all older and had children and that, so we were very close. And her second husband, he didn't have any children. He had children, yes. He had two. Two, but– Conrad and Edna. No. Lily. Lily. Lily and Conrad. But they weren't– Yeah, Edna was Conrad's wife. Grandma didn't care much for them. They were quite ignorant. Grandma was a really– Highly intellectual. Very proud person. Yes. Very proud. And all her life, she wore her hair just one way, and that was the long– and then she braided it around her head. You've seen it many times, I'm sure. It had to be down to her knees. But always dressed nicely and always clean and always had a sense of humor, but a definite matriarch in our family. She was the boss. Well, she was considered the best Swedish cook in the whole settlement of Sweden. Oh, she was marvelous. In Bloomington. Grandma, one time I was visiting Grandma at her house in Bloomington, and she went out to sweep her wok. Her broom inside the house had bristles about like this, you know. When she went out to sweep her wok or the neighbors saw her, she took her new broom. Exceedingly proud. Yes, very proud. And the boss. She was very– Well, I don't remember Grandma ever holding one of us and hugging. No, I don't either. She was never outwardly affectionate, but we know she really loved us. But she was–we always thought her life was so hard that she didn't have time for frivolities. And when she'd talk, if she really was mad, she'd say, I tell you, and boy, you met–oh, you did it. I tell you, you did it. You respected her to your father. Oh, she was the matriarch of the whole family. But how about your mother now? I think Mother kind of resented her a little bit because she was so domineering. Yeah, Mom was bossy. But yet Mother loved her. Oh, yes. And they got along really well. But when they lived together, they didn't get along that well. No, no, no, not then. So she came back then from South Dakota with her husband to Bloomington. Yes. They sold the farm then up there? My dad bought the farm to get them off the farm. Oh, I see. And they lived for a short while in Davenport with the folks. And then they moved back to Bloomington to their grandma's house in Bloomington at 918 West Highway. No, that's my home at 918. That was 10– Yeah. Oh, it lived in our house? Yeah, right. But you bought the farm. You said–did you move up to South Dakota? No. No? No. He sold it. I just bought the farm so they'd feel that it was still in the family and not be so lonesome for the farm in Dakota. You rented the farm for a few years. Yeah. And then Grandpa Olson's granddaughter, wasn't it, who bought it? No, it was Riggs. The Riggs girl bought it. The Riggs girl bought it. Grandpa didn't have a granddaughter. And we have lost contact with that. No. We didn't. Too far away? No, nothing in common. But they were a pair. They were really dangerous. When we were kids, we used to fight. So her second husband, he died before her? He died before her, yes. And then she lived with your– Yes, and then she lived–well, then she moved to California. I lived in Los Angeles, and Jenny has always lived in Moline, and Barb has lived a short time in New York and the rest of the time here. But every year, then Grandma would come back and visit. Her son lived–the son that she kept up with lived in Fort Thomas, Kentucky. Yeah, Gus, yeah. And she would visit with him. And then after my mother died in Los Angeles, my father remarried, and it was two women in one house. And Grandma moved back to Fort Thomas with her son, Gus. Kentucky. Yeah. And that's where she died. But every summer she would come and spend time with my sisters. She never came back to California. She was there in California through her 80th birthday, though, because I had that surprise party on her 80th birthday. She was very happy in her later years because one year I said– one time I said, Grandma, why are you always so happy? And she said, Well, everybody's so good to me. So she was happy in her later years. She meddled a little bit, didn't she? More or less, but don't worry. If it came to anything, jump. That was about it. She could still crochet, even into her 90s. She would sit with her needle. She could still thread her needle, and she would sit and do her crocheting. Beautiful crocheting work. And make her quilts. Yes. Beautiful. Barbara and I were talking. Conrad and Emma had children, didn't they? Yes. Dorothy and Dale and– They lived in California, though, Jenny. Yeah, they moved. They lived in Stockton, California. Yeah, but I remember them living– No, they lived just not too far from Grandma and Grandpa in South Dakota. That was Mother's family, the Pope family. No, no. No, Conrad. It was Conrad. Right. Well, they're unimportant. No, but just to get it straight. Yeah. I don't remember them at all. They were a lot younger than Ellen and I, so we maybe remember that, and she doesn't. Yeah. I don't ever remember playing with them. You didn't miss anything, kid. No, but they did live there. And I remember going to their house. So while you were growing up in Bloomington– No, we didn't live in Bloomington. You didn't live in Bloomington? My father lived in Bloomington. So you came from Bloomington to Davenport, then? After I got out of the Army, where did I go? Right. He was stationed on the arsenal in World War I, and that's where he met our mother. And he married our mother, and we grew up–we were born and grew up in Davenport. Our mother was a Davenport girl. So he was only there a short time in Bloomington, huh? No, no. Well, he was there like 21 years. 18. I think at 18 he went to the service. He joined the service. He was born 1897, and he joined the service in 1917. First World War. First World War. And he never–he was at Fort Camp Funston, and then at the arsenal, and he was in the auditing department, right, Dad? Weren't you in the auditing? After I got out of the Army, I was discharged from the Rock Island Arsenal. But weren't you an auditor in the Army, too? No, no. I worked at the Federal System of Bakeries. No, no. What did you do in the Army, Dad? What did you work at in the Army? I was company clerk for a while. Is that what you're thinking? Oh, yeah. I think so. I kept all the records, yeah. And then he worked at the Federal Bake Shops. There were a string of bakeries years ago, good bakeries. No longer exist. All bookkeeping by hand. I had 14 guys sitting around here with books, writing off all the records for over 100 bakeries. All the reports come in. They copied them by hand. That's a lot of known hands. Gosh. He lived in Davenport all of his life after Bloomington, and then he moved to Los Angeles. Then in 1980, he came back here. He moved to Los Angeles in 1951. 1951. So he worked out there, too, then. In real estate. But most of his life, he was a hatchery man. Had baby chicks. Had a big hatchery in Davenport. He was the largest Prima dealer in the United States. Oh, I see. Oh, I didn't know that. I had 99-box car loads of feed one time. I called up down to St. Louis to order the feed, and I got ahold of Mr. Danforth, and he was the big owner at Prima. I told him I wanted to buy 99-box car loads of Prima feed, and I told him how many tons of this pig feed and cow feed and this chicken feed and everything. I said I'd been to the bank and made arrangements with Herman Stack. Herman, Fred Greenwald and Herman Stack. I said I made arrangements for credit, you can ship it. Site draft bill of lading, and it will be honored. He said, Forget it, Johnson. He said, I'm just looking at your records. He said, I'll ship it to you, open the count. You mean 99 railroad cars? 99 railroad cars of feed. Yeah. The whole train came in. How come they grew so big down in Davenport? Was there a big area here to cover remote Illinois and the... Farmers, chickens and cattle feed. Do you know where the dock is in Davenport? Yes. Well, it was just... At the foot of Perry Street. Yeah, it was just closer to the railroad tracks from the dock, probably 500 feet. It was a freight depot and warehouse, and that's where his hatchery was located and his perina. They came on both rail and barges down from Mississippi. No, the food came all by railroad car. But the people would shop, you know, downtown Peterson's and those stores, and then go in the hatchery and... The farmers. The farmers. This was like in the 1940s. What were you able to achieve all that? You must have some money somewhere. The farmers go to work at 6 o'clock in the morning, and at 6 o'clock in the morning I was on WOC. This is Carl Johnson on WOC, and say good morning to a name of somebody, and I say, I see that you're out milking now. You're out in the barn milking at 6 o'clock. And then I'd tell them what the weather report was and what the outlook was for the weather for the day, and I had reports from New York by then on the feed, what corn was selling for and what they were paying for corn and wheat and oats, and I had a big lot of people that were sitting there milking, you know, listening to all the reports that I gave them. I gave them reports about what they could expect in the grain, what they could expect to get paid for their grain. So it was like following the stock market. Yeah. Just the same thing. And then they'd play music. What was your old program? German polka music. On the radio? Yeah. I picked music that when they were sitting there milking, doo-dee-doo, doo-dee-doo, doo-dee-doo. Wow. Doo-dee-doo. What was the opening of that program? Do you remember? You had a special opening. Something to do with chickens or something? I don't remember, Jim. I don't want to say if I don't remember. Well, anyway. So they had chickens. That means also he sold chickens. Baby chicks. That was my big business, was baby chicks. And then he had a man who would go out and inoculate the chickens, and they would, you know, different diseases. In those days, the farmers all had chickens, and they had a lot of chickens. Nowadays, they have chicken farms and farmers don't ordinarily have chickens, but they did in those days. Were they sent by U.S. mail? No, I hatched them right by hatchery. Yeah? They were delivered locally, but he also sent chickens by U.S. mail to like— Wapiton, North Dakota. Wapiton, North Dakota. It was all over the United States then? No, no, no, no. No, I had Holt, Hughes & Brothers in Wapiton, North Dakota. They were the farthest away, but most all of my business was locally. So they bought them wholesale and then retailed them out up in North Dakota? Yeah. Yeah. But this is Iowa, Illinois area. Most of it. Farming. Was there White Leghorn or Rhode Island or Plymouth? Rhode Island, Red Tree. Hey, you're a farmer, right? No, the big seller was— Barbara Morphe Jensen. Yeah, that's right. They were the big ones. What were those little black and white chickens that used to be so cute? Barred rocks. Oh, they were the cutest babies. Barred rocks, yeah. Our big seller was White Rocks and— White Leghorns. White Leghorns. Of course, the White Rocks had yellow skin. The white skin, like on Buff Arpington's, did sell very good. The markets didn't like it. They liked the yellow-skinned chicken. That's what I hatched most of. I see. How about, though, they didn't ask for any brown or white eggs? No, no. They was only for— Just for hatchery purpose. I was not in the egg business, no. Oh, no? Just that. My granddad, for very many years, I don't know how many years, he was very active in local barbershop quartet area through the Quad Cities, and they had a marvelous, marvelous— He's still can sing. You can't believe him. In 1980, my quartet were— Beautiful voice he still has. In 1980, my— No, Dad, it was back in the 40s. This is 80, Dad. No. It was back in the 40s. Anyway. We were national champions in barbershop quartet singing. I thought it was 1980, but this is 1980s now. I think you're confused on that, Dad. We were national champions. That I know. No, I don't think so, Dad. Me, too. But they were really good. They had a good—and he really enjoyed that for years. They were appearing, like, seeing my quartet solo to different places? Oh, they would sing around different places, yes, locally. Mostly just for fun, but they were really good singers. Dad would go to the convention, barbershop quartet. He'd sing at the vet hospital in Clinton and different organizations. And he loved to sing. His group, there were four of them, to sing. We should tell you, now, his father, we don't really know an awful lot about his father. There is some kind of a strange mystery about his dad. We don't know whether—we have guessed at everything. And we've tried to check at the church in Milby. There's that, the church. Yes, and we have gotten absolutely nowhere, which is strange, because you know how those churches keep such marvelous records. Well, nothing. We have wondered, and once, only once, does Dad remember that his mother started to talk about his father, tell him about his father. And all of a sudden, she stopped, and that was the end of it. So we have often wondered what exactly. Was he married and left the family? Had he committed a crime? He hadn't committed a crime, what's where to that? No, and his father was really musically inclined. Dad said he could play any kind of instrument and was just marvelous and lived on a farm, we know, out from Milby. I brought Dad to church, that's V-E-T-A. Was that V-E-T-A or W-E-T-A? V-E-T-A. Veta, Veta churka. There's Milby outside in Milby. Dad is very good at writing, and he has written. You are, Dad, you're marvelous at writing his early days in Bloomington, Illinois. Like the store, he'd take, he would take a certain theme and he would write about it. And he was so good at it, like the store, you could smell the herring, and you could smell the pickle jars, and see the cracker jars. He's very good at descriptive things. You are, Dad, you're fabulous at that. So you have a little Sweden down in Bloomington? Ja, det här är vi. Lutfisk och blodpalt. Östrund. Palt, ja. I'll tell you, there's one everywhere. In Los Angeles we found it too. At Christmas time we'd go and we'd get the lutefisk. I fixed it once. Oh, goodness. Oh, I don't like you. It stunk for a week in my house. But we had the herring. Hållt din grandma sig den? Well, those things didn't bother Grandma, because when my Grandma was living, every Christmas Eve, she would have, after we had opened our gifts, we would invite Dad and Mom, and Grandma would have, like a lot of my friends would come in, and their friends would come over and they would have a real feast. And Grandma would have prepared her Swedish dishes, and of course everybody looked forward to it. So Grandma was in Georgetown for Christmas? She was. She and Mother, my Mother could cook Swedish food too, but Grandma would do the fancy, like I can remember, and I have the dish in there that Grandma put it in. She'd take a cucumber and she'd slice it just so, and in between she would put the little slices of radish, so it was red and green. Oh, really? And then she'd put the little pieces of dark... So this Toss and Leave Tort now, can you tell me the ingredients? Well, it was several layers of like, almost like a cookie dough, with a cooked dried fruit filling in between, as I remember it, and whipped cream. Whipped cream on top of it? On top of it, but not around it, just on top, and then decorative on top. Grandma would decorate it on top. So that was Grandma's specialty? That was Grandma's specialty. She was known as the best Swedish cook in Bloomington. I guess she was. She was one of the best cooks in the world. I don't care what she cooked, it was the best. And my mother learned a lot of it, and we girls cooked some of it. But you know, ours never tastes as good as Grandma's or Mother's. Did she teach you how to do it? A lot of it she did, and we just learned as we got older, we learned. Your mother. Grandma taught me how to bake bread, Swedish bread. Lempa. Right there? Yeah. With wheat bread or rye? Rye. Lempa. And I still use her recipe. There's just one dab of that and another one of that? Well, no, I've got it all written down. And it is super marvelous. The way she made it. Oh, you can get it. Grandma didn't teach me to cook anything, I don't think. You had it easy, you only had to watch. No, I had to watch and learn. There's too much age difference. My husband's parents were Swedish, too, his dad was born in Sweden. And I learned an awful lot of Swedish cooking from my mother-in-law. Pickle herring and Johnson's Temptation, I make every Christmas, a lot of Swedish things. And root mousse. And like, shill, shill. We all make that. And my husband's father was Swedish, his parents came from Sweden, and his mother's parents came from Denmark. So my husband's half-Sweden, half-Dane. So my mother-in-law did a lot of Swedish cooking, too, which was like Danish cooking, I guess. So she taught me a lot. Where are you from in Sweden? It didn't say. No, you went up, he lived on Olive in the church, which was only about four blocks away. And then all the sweets would come back to your house, wouldn't they? Yeah. And Grandma would have all this marvelous food prepared. Swedish foods. And they would have a drink, what would you have to drink? Whiskey. You would have whiskey, yes, whiskey. No glögg. Oh, glögg, too, sure. We all had glögg at Christmas. Yes, but he used to tell about some of the characters back there. Tell them, Dad, about Mr. Sandberg and the safe. Tell that story. Gosh, I don't remember telling it. Well, I remember it. Do you remember it? No, I don't remember it. There was an old Swede who lived across the street from Dad. The whole area was Swedish, wasn't it, Dad? All the way from the Lutheran church, clear down to the railroad tracks. And this Mr. Sandberg had a shop of some kind, a Lexus shop. Anyway, he was marvelous mechanically. And there was a safe at a bank in Bloomington. People's Bank. That nobody could open. They lost the key. They couldn't have lost the combination. But anyway, this Mr. Sandberg said to them, you do what at 6 in the morning? I'll be there. Anyway, at 6 in the morning, Mr. Sandberg was there. And how did he open that safe, Dad, with a sledgehammer? I remember he banged at it with the sledgehammer, and the things dropped down, the cylinders dropped down, and he reached over and opened it up. At a certain time, you see, he had figured out what time that would open. Oh, he was real good. That was at the People's Bank. And his wife, we didn't know, but years later, I graduated from Illinois State, so I used to go to Mrs. Sandberg's after he was gone. And we would always go there for dinner, and oh, my God, it got so, we almost hated to be invited because we had to eat everything she had. Oh, she had so much. She would have roast beef, roast pork, maybe some other meat. She'd have three desserts. She'd have all of the marvelous, wonderful food. Always angel food cake. Always angel food cake. And you know, by then, you would be so full, but it was so much fun. And, of course, they spoke English, but Dad told us years later what I thought was so interesting because we didn't know it at the time. They didn't tell us when we were young that Mrs. Sandberg used to get on a toot all the time. She was a big drinker, wasn't she, Dad? She'd get drunk, and Mom would have to go over and cook supper and get everything. She was so drunk, she couldn't cook supper. Isn't that rare? It is unusual, isn't it, that the women would do that? Well, she had been– she worked in a tavern or whatever they called it in Sweden. In Sweden? In Sweden, yes. And she just liked her booze and that's the way– like that she got on a big toot. Grandma always had her medicinal bottle, too. She'd have to take a little nip when she wasn't feeling it. Probably about every night she'd have just a swig. And Grandma used to do funny things. I have to tell you about one time. I think it was in L.A. She did this. Grandma never wore any makeup or just wore her hair that same way all her life. One time she put on earrings and makeup and came out. I– as a joke– oh, my God, we laughed our heads off. She was so ridiculous. You know, really funny. I'll go get a picture. One little, wrong, old time. Remember, Barb? She smoked a cigarette just to see what it was like. She was curious. Grandma, his mother. And another– and also she wanted to ride on a plane. And she did. She took a plane trip from Moline to Cincinnati where her son– another son lived just across the river in Kentucky. But she wanted to experience these things. To be modern. Yeah. One thing Grandma always wanted to do and which we didn't do, she wanted to go to a real tavern once just to see what it was like. We didn't even know a real tavern to take her to. Had to be careful. That's probably when she started having her medicinal bottle. Oh, she'd have a beer. When Harry'd sit down, he'd have a beer. Grandma sat down, had a beer or two. This is my grandmother and my grandfather at their marriage, the second marriage. And this is my dad and his brothers when they were little. Can you tell which one's our dad? This is the one. I'm the best looking one. You are. This is my– Great-grandfather. Yes, in Sweden. In Mjølby. No, yeah. No, this is my grandfather. This is my dad's father. And this is my great-grandmother in Sweden with three of her sons. And this is Grandma when she got older. And that's how we really remember Grandma most of the time. Like this. Like that, yeah. But even Art showed a new Grandma. Oh, yes. But loved to laugh. She loved to laugh at a joke. And would, you know, get a– One thing, she had a sense of humor. When she– I lived in Inglewood, California at the time. And she was sitting in a chair and my one boy, my grandma's arm, you know how the flesh hangs when they get older? And Steve was standing there and he was jiggling her arm. And that was your son? My son. Her great-grandson. But he was jiggling her arm and just looking at it. And he was old, maybe about five at the time. And all of a sudden he turned around and he put his little face up in front of Grandma. And he said, Grandma, you're about going to die, aren't you? I tell you, she laughed. And she laughed till she wept. She had a great sense of humor. She thought that was really funny. Do you want to see these, Dad? My father in Muleby was raised on a farm in Muleby. Do you want to look at them? No. But then he moved into Muleby, the town of Muleby in Uster Yetland, and he worked in a flour mill there. Yeah. In Muleby. But he did in a flour mill. We don't know– Oh, he ground the flour. He helped grind the millstones. Yeah, we saw those millstones. And he had those big millstones, and they had them there in the park in Muleby that we saw. And that was part of his job. Of course, I suppose as a young man, as I said, we were very little– Well, he cut the grooves so that the grain could grind. Sure, he'd chop edges so they can– Well, six years ago, Dad took we three girls–we had no other brothers or sisters, just the three of us–to Sweden, and we went up to our grandmother's home in Sweden, Edstein, and went off to the farm and went to the location of her home, which is no longer standing, but there is another house there. And we went to Muleby and stayed in Muleby. We stayed in Edstein about, what, three or four days? Three days. And while we were there, we spent quite a bit of time with my dad's cousin, who still lives there. As far as we know, he still lives there. As far as I know. Delmar Adel. Yeah. Delmar Adel. And then we spent a few days in Muleby and just walked all over and looked at everything and didn't know really where our grandfather lived, but it was such a thrill to do this. That's your grandmother lived in Edstein. Edstein. Pop lived in Muleby. I said that. But Dad was in Muleby the first time. He was in the post office mailing postcards home to we three girls, and he asked the postmaster if he had ever heard of Emma Edling, who was Grandma's... That was Edstein. Yes, in Edstein. Yeah, you said... That was your mother's mother. Mother's... my grandmother's half-sister, Emma. My father's aunt, Emma. And the man said, yes, we knew her as Coffee Emma because she had a little coffee shop. Coffee Emma, ja. And the man next to my father said, of course, in Swedish, he said, how do you know of Emma Edling? And Dad said, well, she was my aunt. The man said, well, she's my aunt also. And that was this Hjalmar we spent time with. Dad's cousin was standing right next to him. And it was the first time you met him. It was the first time he met him. And they even kind of looked alike. They do. They looked very much alike. Poor unfortunate man. Whatever happened to Hjalmar? Hjalmar? H-J-A-L-M-E-R. So you learned Swedish in your home then, in Bloomington? Oh, yeah, we talked Swedish. And in the summertime, we hated it, we kids, Swedish kids. We had to go to Swede school in the summertime for a half day. And the rest of the kids were out in the swimming hole someplace. We had to go to Swede school. We hated it. As soon as the Swede school was out, we headed for the swimming hole. Swede school, Dad, or English? In the summertime. Or English? No, no, we taught Swedish. He was in a church, confirmation life. Down in the basement at the church. Dad said that none of the children, they wanted their parents to learn to speak English. So he said if Grandma would come out and call twice in English, they would run for home because he knew the third time that Grandma would call them in Swedish. And then the other children would say, oh, doesn't your mother speak English yet? It was a good trick. Would you like to see my– You were the one who was telling me about the chicken pox on the– Yes. What was not chicken pox. They took off. Grandma left the ship, got the ship at Göteborg, and then the ship went to– down to Copenhagen, or Chippenhamen. Chippenhamen, yeah. More people. And while they were there, somebody on board the ship came down with smallpox. So they took the ship back to Göteborg. Yes. And they had to sit in the harbor there in Göteborg for, I think it was two or three weeks. I know it was quite a while. They had to sit there in the harbor to see if the rest of the ship was going to come down with smallpox. But nobody else got smallpox, so the ship sailed for America. And they went to Ellis Island, of course. And Grandma– and I can't remember too much. Maybe my sisters can remember more about Ellis Island, but I remember Grandma saying how awful it was. She was 17 years old. And she had a sign on her that gave her name in Bloomington, Illinois. Destination, yeah. Her relative's name in Bloomington. Of course, she came alone. She was 17 years old. She came alone. She did not speak any English. But she came to Ellis Island without any problems? Yes. She was not detained for any time? No. Not that we know of. She was healthy. Did I tell you her name? Brita Kristina Edling? I told you that, I think. It's a nice name, unusual name. Edling. Edle over there, they call her. Edling in Swedish is like an orphan, isn't it? An edling, is that an orphan? Is that entirely different than edling? No. Edling, like one who is alone? An orphan? No, it's Edling. It can be Edling. No. No, it doesn't really mean anything. It's just a name. Oh. There's no meaning with that word, Illinois. Mm-hm. It could be some old, old term, but I never heard of it. I was Carl Gunnar, my brother was Gustav Walf, and my youngest brother was Thurie Waldemar. All Swedish names. Swedish names, yeah. So you were confirmed then in Swedish and Blom? Yes, that was me. Yes. Do you speak good Swedish? I think so. Yes. Really good. Because I was old then. Yes. Do you remember any Swedish psalms or prayers you read in school or church? Okay. Dad, you always sing to Hälsa, dem, der, himma. Oh, that was the best. Yes, the... Hälsa, dem, der, himma, Hälsa far och mör, Hälsa, gren och hagen, Hälsa, lille bror, Om jag har det vinner, flydde jag till dig, Svarar flyd mot himma, Hälsa ifrån mig. He has a lot of Swedish records. We've all bought him records. And he sits and listens to them and enjoys them. That was Saga Grandpa's funeral. Yes, it is. I sang my babies to sleep with that one. That was our lullaby. So while you were all singing with this quartet here in Davenport, you didn't sing any Swedish, though? No. There was only English. All English. The other boys, there was all Swedish boys, but they didn't speak much Swedish. They were Swedish? Oh, yeah. Carl Gunnar... Paul Samberg and Kenny. Ray Englund, Paul Samberg and Kenny Samberg and me, yeah. Oh, I see. We were national champions, by the way. We were national champions in barbershop quartet singing in 1980. No, Dad. No, Dad. You're so confused on that. No. You haven't been with that quartet, Dad, since 1950. We won't argue about that. The years pass so fast, you know. They go so rapidly. You have a good memory, though. Dad, I was hoping that you could remember and tell this man about me. And tell this man about some of the funny nicknames the Swedes had in Bloomington. Remember how you had some of the... There was some fella named Charlie, what was his... And about the drunks, how they go home and stumble down the streets, and how they were... Oh, you had such... One Katie at the mine, yeah. Funny names for those people. Who was the man that cut the tree down and he was sitting on the limb? And broke his leg, too. He was sitting on the limb and cut the tree down here, so when the limb fell, he was sitting on the part of the limb that fell. And that was a Swede. Yeah. And dum-bum. Oh, can you think of any of those funny names, though? And who was the other Swede that was painting his house and he had his paintbrush on the long end of a... I think these were stories Grandpa also told you. He had his paintbrush on the end of a long pole painting his house way up here instead of climbing a ladder and painting his house. That wasn't so dumb. But I wish you could think of some of those funny, funny names that you used to tell us about the stories of some of those... I can think of one story, but I don't think you should tell it about the guy talking to his baby. Go ahead and tell it. I don't remember it. Well, that was a local... That was a farmer, though. Yeah, he was a Swede. No, that was a farmer. I thought that was a... An Iowa farmer. A Swede. No, no. Oh, Lord, don't tell that, please. Ha ha ha ha! He doesn't want that on it. A lot of characters, huh? Oh, those old times. We had them. They were characters. So there were big Swedish cows then in Blomgatan. Did they have any lodges of any sort down in Blomgatan, do you remember? Did they have that Vasa Lodge? Yeah, but I was remembering something in Sunday school. I was trying to think. What was it now? You have an example. Grandpa Johnson belonged to some of those organizations. Vasa? What was it? Vasa? Vasa, yeah. Grandpa Johnson also was a director of a Swedish male chorus. In Blomgatan? Yes. Dad, what was that group that you belonged to? You said you had to put your pennies in for the orphans or something. No, it was just in Sunday school. Down at Andover Homes. They were probably in the church, though, because they were in Santa Ana. Yeah. You told me that was some organization your father was chairman of. So you had to give a penny in every Sunday or something? Oh, yeah, a penny. Of course, you couldn't pay any less, but that's what we gave was a penny. My father worked in the coal mine, and I think Pop got $12 a week, and Mom took in washings, and she made about the same amount taking in washings. But she worked from crack of dawn. She'd be down at 6 o'clock in the morning, and I remember that so well because she was down in the basement to heat up the water and had this big cotton boiler on the stove. I sat at the window, and somebody had thrown a little rock in the hole about this big that hit me right in the back of the neck on a cold winter morning. Grandma used to take in washings. Oh, he did. Then she was a nursemaid after when she was a widow. She was a nursemaid to Mrs. Reverend Ward. Mrs. Reverend Bergstrom. Bergstrom. Grandma talked if anybody, if the husband was a pastor, then the wife was Mrs. Reverend or Mrs. Pastor, or if the husband was a doctor, then the wife was Mrs. Doctor, so-and-so. She loved titles. I remember Dad always saying, too, when he was young, he and his brothers, like on a Sunday or a holiday, they'd go to the park, and they'd have lunch there, and Grandma always had cold over. Always. And that was such a thrill. That was her favorite thing to eat, I think. I think it was. And Dad would still always pass you papers when you were a young boy. When you were a paper boy. Oh, well, gosh, thousands of kids have done that. You got up at what time in the morning? I was up when the wind came off the press. First I was there about 3.30 because I met a train out of Chicago down to C&A Depot. It came through at 4.20, and I was down there with papers at 4.20 in the morning. So you had to get up and walk, what, about a mile down to the paper? No, it was nine blocks to the paper to get the paper, and then it was about 12 blocks down to C&A Depot. In all kinds of weather, rain, cold, snow. Oh, yeah. I jumped off the front porch with the snow up to my behind. Boy, kids don't do like that anymore. Well, you don't send your kids out in the dark streets anymore. Oh, that's right. It isn't safe. Could you keep that money you made from that paper out there? Oh, sure. You didn't have to pay anything in your home for it? When I sold the papers, I bought so many papers, I had three for a dime. Then I sold those for a nickel apiece, or 10 cents if I get it. But mostly the people gave a tip. Sometimes a seven nickel, they gave me a dime. One morning, a rich guy gave me a quarter for a paper. So you got cash right away? Oh, right away. You didn't collect weekly or anything like that? No, no. That was when I sold papers. When I passed the papers that belonged to the pantograph, they paid $2.25 a week. So I'd jump off the snow up to my behind and go up and get the papers, and then I'd deliver it all over to Stevensonville. But then I was home around 7 o'clock or so and had breakfast and then off to school. Oh, yeah. That was a good morning. Yeah, well, I got $2.25 a week, you know, and I could buy a suit of clothes in those days for $9, and I have bought them for $9. But you were a little boy a lot when you passed those papers. Oh, sure I was. You were grade school age. Sure, yeah. And, Dad, I have on my – down in my entry hall, Dad bought – saved money, and he bought Grandma a little leaf plate, and he paid 15 cents for this beautiful, hand-heated plate. Oh, I remember that. Hand-painted. That is on my entry hall now. Shaped like an oak leaf. Yes, right. So that was quite a gift in those days. How about Christmas now? Christmas tree, what kind of tree did you have? Did you have a spruce or a fir? Do you remember that? We had a green tree. I don't know which. A green tree. Yeah, I don't know which it was. And Dad, he picked it up, then he hung or – Yeah, and he made a little square to stick it in, you know, to keep it – Was it a big, tall tree or a small tree? Oh, no, it would go to the roof, to the ceiling, yeah. Did you have candles on, Dad? Oh, sure, we had candles. Well, we had real candles. We didn't have – later on, as I remember, we got electric candles, but at first we had just the plain tallow candles. We had to watch that because the tree got dry, and they had a lot of fires with those trees, catching fire on those. You said your father, too, used to burr – used to cut off the limbs and then burr in the limbs and put the limbs so the tree would be – Perpetual. Perpetually shaped. Yeah, yeah. They were careful, then it must have been good. Yeah, oh, yes. And they didn't want any trees with broken tops? No. No. Do you remember why? Why? No. They never told you that? Not that I remember. No? Why? Our experiences with the Swedes in Sweden, outside of what time did – were we there? My God, they were drunk on the streets in Stockholm, falling down drunk. No, we were there for May – for the June, June now. Worse than Mrs. Hamburg, huh? Oh, but we were there for midsummer. Midsummer, yeah, I see. But we were really treated so well, you couldn't – we couldn't believe it. At the hotel in Edsby, it was my second time I made the reservation. I wrote the manager and asked him if we could have – oh, what was that? Whip coffee. No, no. I asked for that little herring – skrimmig. What's skrimmig? We had had that before. And he wrote back and he said he was afraid we couldn't – it would be not in the season. But do you know every day they'd ask us what we wanted to eat and they would fix it every meal. Oh, and one – Or every meal. One day we had – Kruppkakor. Kruppkakor. It was fabulous. And there were this many. They brought out one platter. We thought that was it. My God, they kept bringing it and we kept eating it and eating it. And the fun part of it was that there were only like four or five tables of people in the dining room. Well, there were two different men, correct me if I am not correct, sitting by themselves. So we just started visiting with them. They came over and joined us and sat at the table with us. And they were Swedish. And then Dad's cousin, Hjalmar, was there. And we had all these platters and platters of Kruppkakor. And then at the very – Heaven. And we sat, you know, with it, and then at the very end this one man sent us a bottle of cloudberry liqueur for after dinner. He was from Carlstead. Well, anyway, they treated us. Oh, they greeted us all. Yeah. And we had the Swedish flag and the American flag on. Oh, and at the table whenever we'd get – I remember at Mule Bee especially. Who's – was it somebody's birthday? Sheila's. Sheila's birthday. We celebrated Sheila's birthday. And we had the flag, the American flag on the table for us and all. Oh, they did that in Edsby too. Oh, they do that a lot. Listen, are we ready now for coffee? Hold that there. Edsby, you know something about your mother's hometown? Yeah, that was Edsby. But I had a – no, it slipped my mind. I waited too long. It left me. About her house. Grandpa used to talk about the nightingales that sang in the woods across from her house. So we were standing in the area where Grandma's house – it's a different house now on her lot. And while we were standing there, the nightingales started singing. It was really thrilling. I was thinking about the night we were in Edsby. And we came in, and there was a whole row of men, boys, sitting up along the wall. And there were two rows, one down closer to the band. And so I danced with a few girls, and finally these fellows sat along the wall, and I ordered two double shots for each of them, you know, booze. And got a couple shots in them. They melded up, and I said, If you come down to my flicker, and I knew Poet Carne and Garstick, come over and dance with the girls. We had a lot of fun. Do you use cream in your coffee? I don't really remember. So you had a good visit then in your – In Edsby, yeah. Oh, we had a marvelous time. And the funny thing was the night we got there, we were so thrilled and so excited. The hotel we stayed in had been there when our grandmother lived there. And we saw pictures on the walls in the hotel lobby of about 1890 when she would leave there. The train station was very old. Yeah. But we went out and we walked the streets, and it was still light out. And there was nobody on the streets, so we couldn't figure out why until we finally realized. It was like 11 or 11 to midnight. And it was still light. This little village was only about 11, 12 miles south of the North Pole, way up north. Oh, oh. Yeah, okay. It is a little bit further, but it's very light up there. Yeah. It was light all night. The boys sat along over there, and the girls would dance with them. And finally I went over and ordered two shots. Did I tell you this? Two shots of whiskey for them. Yeah. Yes, it's a – Boy, that softened them up, and they danced then. And the Christmas, no, the Christmas – the candles in the Christmas tree, they were lit on Christmas Eve. Yeah. But how about some other times? Well, we had them, too, but officially they were lighted on Christmas Eve. Was that the same day you got the Christmas presents, or in the evening? No, by morning then. Next morning we got them, yeah. Then the – Did Santa Claus came then, or – No, we didn't have any Santa Claus. No Santa Claus? No. No? No. Folks would stop in, you know, close friends would stop in the house and have a couple shots of booze and – We would see you Crawford, to come in the morning. Had all the Christmas goodies that Mom had been working two weeks to prepare, and everybody had a real good time and a good visit, and all friendly.