 This is cassette 2, page 1. It's a continuation of Carl W. Strömqvist in Rockford, Illinois. Cassette 2, page 1. They were experienced in winemaking. They made, well, booze, yeast, that was moonshine. And you could get a kick out of it. They had alcohol, straight alcohol in gallon cans. How did they get that, though? Because they need barrels of alcohol, you know, the way they sold it. And they put it in these cans. The cans were made by, I don't know if it was made by Clark Manufacturing or where they bought the cans from. But I don't know if they made them or not. But it was gallon, tin cans, they were square. And a gallon of booze they'd put in there, moonshine, and sell it by the gallon, you know. And they didn't sell it in bottles? Oh yeah, yeah, they had that. Later on, one guy, he'd ask what kind of whiskey you wanted. He got the labels, you know, and he'd put on whatever you want. Like Sonny Brook or Old Taylor, and put it up in pint bottles. And they'd color it, because the alcohol was white. Put a little coloring in there, and it just looked like brandy, you know, real stuff, bottled in the barn. Was this good moonshine, or some of it was... Some of it was rotten, it was no good, but some of it was pretty good, you know. 80, 90 proof, what the hell. But what happened if somebody died, you know, from poisoning of a... Some dead, you got blind and wild and delirium. That would be just natural death. That's good. Involving fluid. Yeah, you're right. So you didn't have to take any booze back then to the east side when you went over to the west side? No, if I want, then yeah. I mean, when you emptied all 500 ponds of yeast, there was plenty of room left for gallon cans. Well, I didn't have any gallon cans, I didn't monkey with those, but they had them for sale. You know, you could get them. I had a baker up in Freeport, Billerbeck, and he bought... He had a big semi-truck loaded with empty cans. Now, I don't know who made them or where he got them, but the cops stopped them anyway, and I don't know... Because they knew what it was going to be for. They were empty, but they were for bootleggers or somebody would put alcohol in or something. I don't remember what they fined them or what, but... He didn't say the reason. It was in the paper, you know, about it. And he was an old-time baker up there. It's strange, though, how they could dare buck the police force, you know, with big semi-trailers and thousands of cans. You would think they would be taken right away. But don't you think they were paid off, though? Oh, sure. I wouldn't doubt it. They must have. Just look the other way, you know, the truck passing. Yeah, they must have. What the hell? Like Eric Lindstrom said, you know, I haven't taken a drink in two weeks. Yeah, yeah, Emil Lindstrom, yeah. Yeah, he was quite a guy. He could make damn good glug. Ian Hallstrom. Yeah. Well, but now Hallstrom, for instance, he was the mayor of... Rockford. And they was doing the probation. He was a bricklayer. But for him to make good glug, he needed some of the strong stuff. Oh, yeah, oh, sure. How did he get it? Oh, I don't know. He bought it up the club from somebody. But the Swedes, they were not any booze-makers then doing the probation. They bought from somebody else. Most of them, well, some Swedes made their own home brew. Home brew hires. You could buy extract in the grocery store, and a couple of cakes of yeast and make up a batch of beer, you know. Or buy a can of hops, malt syrup, malt syrup with hops. But there was a lot of, you could do that. Oh, yeah. So yeast business, there was a good... There was a damn good bracket. So there was no way for you not to start your own by the yeast? No. Oh, they wouldn't... No, the company wouldn't let you. They wouldn't let you do that? No, no, no. I wanted to do that, but no. That was later years when, you know, you could see it was going the other way. But, I mean, so I'd be a distributor because my competitors had it that way. Anheuser-Busch and Red Star. So you had competitors? Oh, yeah, yeah. But not, I don't know why, I'm not bragging, but I had most of the business. They didn't have any of the big ones. So you were busy then? Oh, you're damn right I was. Long days. But it was better than working in the grocery store. Oh, sure. And eventually you got over $20 a week. Oh, yes, yes. Yes, I got up to, but I worked for, still I worked for peanuts. You know, you wouldn't believe it. You know what I get for pension from the company after 40 years? Did you belong to a union then? No, sir. I would never join a union. You have a pension? Yeah, but you know how much I get a month after 40 years with them? $600? $46.20 a month. But think, you know, if you had a union, you got $460 a month. That's okay, I had no use for unions. They're the ruin of the country. You believe that? Yes, sir. But this is a union town, though. Yeah. When you go down to Lyran and sit at the bar there, you have to be careful, though, when a greenleaf worker comes in there and suns down and they start talking. I don't say nothing. That's what I mean. You got respect for the union, though. I don't say anything, hell, I'm just telling you, but I hope you don't record that, for Christ's sake. I know, hell, let them have them, but my personal feelings, this is no damn good, because I never would belong to a union anyway. I don't think I would if I had to. I don't think I would have joined. But don't you think the wages have increased over the union? Well, I suppose. The more money the worker gets, the more he can buy. Yeah, but look at all the crooks in it. Look at Chicago, the crooks in the union. They're all crooked bastards. There are no Swedes in there. There are Swedes that are crooked, too, plenty of them. You've been in Rockford since 1910. Yeah. You've seen how they've been growing up. The first generation is dead now and the second and third one is coming along. Have they been described as honest Swedes here in Rockford? You can trust them in politics and in dealings and wheelings. Well, most of them. They have a good reputation. Yeah, oh, sure. Yeah, sure, they do. So when you, for instance, went over to the west side with the yeast, the businessmen over on the other side, they didn't like the Swedes, but they liked you, though. They respected you as being an honest person. I don't know whether they did. I don't either. But I was, damn it, or I could have been rich. But I was too damn honest, I guess. Well, I was because I did. Maybe that's a trait, you know, that's in the way for the Swedes. Well, maybe so, but no, I never did. I never did any of that, damn it. Maybe I'd be in prison now, but I never absconded any money or anything, never. You have a good moral standing from your parents. Right. But to work all those years, 40 years, and then get $46.20 pension, that ain't a hell of a lot of money. You still get it, yeah, from three different insurance companies. How about your insurance over sickness? During that time when you worked as a flight attendant, were you insured in case you got sick? Oh, I suppose, yeah. You were never sick? No. You never collected anything? No. Because there was a problem years ago, there was no insurance. Yeah, I know. I broke my hip, but that was long after. I retired in 1962 from the company, and I've been working ever since. I started in 1922 with them and left in 1962, that's 40 years. Why did you leave so suddenly? You had another 20 years to go there. I know, but they were making changes, and I think they wanted to get rid of me. So you dropped out, and then where did you start to work? I thought I was going to get about $300 pension, and that's what I didn't follow up either. I should have taken it up with the headquarters in New York, you know, because I got the letter yet from my district manager in Chicago telling me I was going to get $325 a month or something like that in pension, and then it ended up me getting $40, and I never got a lawyer, and I could have caused them some trouble, but I didn't. What I mean, though, if you had the union behind you, Well, then it might have been different. You would have taken your side. I suppose. That's the way it goes. I was too damn dumb to do that. So that is one of the... Yeah, we had two, well, first, of course, I was on the truck, and then afterwards I got a better job, so I wasn't on the truck. I had a car, and then I made different branches. We had a branch in Rockford, a branch in Joliet, and a branch in Madison, and so I'd go around and visit them, see? I see. They're still selling? Oh, yeah. They didn't deliver? No, we had branch offices in each town, trucks in each place, see? Aurora and Madison. Was there any change now in the yeast product from 1922 up to 1962? Any change in it? I mean, a different substance or different value of it? Everything changes, you know, but yeast, was it the same as... Yeah, well, Fleischmann's, that was the best known and the best yeast on the market. But now they've gone out of it. They've cut out making the yeast, they tell me. And all the money they had in the factories and the packing plants and everything in Chicago and all over, they just dropped that, and competition must have all the yeast. And then the stores, the big supermarkets, they got their own bakeries in Chicago. Well, we got Rockford Bakeries here that makes bread for them, make all the bread and deliver it to the stores. But there's no yeast fabrication in Rockford? It's bought from outside? Yeah, there's no... Well, we got one distributor that sells yeast, just a small distributor. He's got his warehouse between Cherry Valley and Belvedere. But like I say, I know he doesn't sell... We used to have Colonial Bakery. They never used anything but Fleischmann's yeast, but... So now it's gone, so I guess he's handling Red Star or Anheuser-Busch. They were competitors. I was lucky. They never got a very good foothold in Rockford. They were pretty damn loyal to me, the bakers. They would just not buy anything else, which I appreciated. You delivered fast and prompt service, I suppose. You're damn right. Rain or shine, snow or sleet, you'd always... That's one thing they need. They'd call me any time of the night. And they can't stock up on yeast? Well, not too much. We delivered every day, though, to them. Every day? Grocery stores twice a week, maybe some once a week. You mean the bakeries got to have fresh yeast every morning? Yeah, every day we delivered to bakeries, every day. Why couldn't they keep one load overnight and start... They didn't. They had a big refrigerator upstairs. There'd be 600, 700 pounds of yeast every day there. They'd throw on a skid up on the elevator and in the refrigerator. Sunbeam, there was another big one. So we sold a lot of yeast that way. So what happened if you missed one day? You didn't miss. You lost a customer, though. You didn't miss. What do you mean miss? In other words, they'd go up at 2 o'clock in the morning and start to knead the dough, you know, the bakers. And yeast got them in there. Oh, and they'd run out of yeast? Yeah. They'd call me. And I'd go in if they... Any time during the day? Any time, day or night. So I think they appreciated what I did all those years, you know. Well, hell, they'd call me for, could you get me five pounds of salt to hold me over? I forgot to order it today. 2, 3 o'clock in the morning. I'd go and borrow it from another baker and take it over there. Oh, I'm telling you. So you had the key to every baker then? No, no. I mean... They were working nights. They were working nights, yeah. So I'd get in and just pound on the door. Highland Bakery or Freeburg's. Have you been to Rockford long? Sure, I know it. You knew all of them. You know every pothole in Rockford and every street. Yeah, god damn, yeah. I wish you'd pick some of them. How were the streets when you started in 1922? You know, the other day, not for... Well, a lot of streets you sit and wait for the damn stoplights along. No, I didn't tell you that. I don't think. So up here now on James, Welty, and State Street. That's a busy one. That's a good one. That's a busy one. Swan Hillman's home sits up there. That's where Swan Hillman lived, that beautiful white house. Or were you here? Yeah, sure, I know where he lived. So it's even longer now, but you have to wait for the damn lights. So I called the mayor's office. His honor wasn't in. I talked to his girl, and I says, I would appreciate finding out if I would be out of order to... I want to get a card table and a coffee pot and a few sandwiches, and I want to put it up on East State Street and Welty and have a cup of coffee. That's how slow the lights are changing to go. She laughed like hell. I didn't hear any more. But I really did that. Why do they have it like that? Well, you know... Has it always been like that? No, they changed it so it's longer now. You have to wait there longer, really. Everybody's complaining, but they don't do anything about it. What the hell they can do? Years ago there was no stoplights. No. So you have seen Rockford growing up then with the shopping centers, Oh, boy. Loughs Park, Alpine Road. I can't believe it. Unbelievable. You know. God. But most of the changes in Rockford, they happened after World War II, though. Oh, yeah. They were really happened, though. Blossom up. Yeah. But you've seen all the furniture factories, Scandia. Oh, boy. Union. Union Furniture. Why did they leave that out? Rockford Cabinet, Illinois. I don't know. Was there a union, you think? I wouldn't doubt it. I wouldn't doubt it. Illinois Cabinet, Rockford Cabinet. Sewing Machine. National Locks. Swan Hillman. They didn't like unions. No. That's right. He was a strong man. He could bend a horseshoe. Did he appear on any performances in town? Swan? Yeah. Or he just did it for fun? Oh, yeah. He was a damn good wrestler, they told me. But, I mean, he belonged to Svea Sauner. Was there before your time he was a wrestler? He was what? Was there before your time he was a good wrestler? Swan Hillman. Yeah, I don't remember him. Yes, I don't remember him doing that at all. But, I mean, I met him because of being up to Svea Sauner. He was an old man when you met him in 1920. Yeah, he wasn't young. Hell of a nice guy. So there were some colorful people here in Rockford. Oh, you're not kidding. Head of the piano company. Were they all Republicans? Well, I don't know if they were or not. Socialists, some of them. How about you now? Yeah, Republican. Republican? Yeah. You wouldn't even think about leaning towards the... No, sir. Why? Hell no, I don't know. Joe, you must get this idea somewhere. You just don't sign yourself as a Republican without the cause. I don't know what caused it. But I could never see the Democrats. Was that because the Irish and the Italians, they were Democrats? Maybe, yeah, that could be. Maybe that was it. I don't know. But the Swedes, they were Republicans. Yeah. Well, there's some that don't know any better and they're Democrats. But you didn't vote. When did you become a citizen, though? 19... Oh, I became a citizen because my father was a citizen. So you were automatic in that when you... Because I was underage, so I automatically... Became a citizen. Yeah, I didn't have to. And I got the papers. I got all four when my dad became a citizen of America. And then, oh, when I was growing up, of course, we used to go hunting. And I had to get a license. Your dad, too? Oh, he never did. He just worked seven days a week. I had to get a license to have a gun and go hunting. But being foreign-born, you know, I had trouble anyway. I had to prove that my father was a citizen. Well, of course, I didn't want him to know that I was... Because he wouldn't have approved of it. Go not eat chicken. You had to go to your dad and ask for validation of his citizenship. Well, I never did. No, hell, I don't think he... Well, I found out about it some way. So you could prove it? Oh, yeah. Well, I got the papers in there yet. You know, when he came and said... I don't know how the hell I got it, but I got it. So I used to go hunting with the guys who had rifles, shotguns, and stuff like that. You were interested in hunting? Yeah, of course I was a poor shot. Oh, and now I don't have a damn gun. I don't know what somebody stole them. I never have... I don't have... I had a Winchester repeater. I had a Savage rifle repeater. And the ejector, you know, the ejector shells broke. And it was during the war, and the plant wouldn't do anything for me. So I worked with the guy up at the Greenleafs in the bit shop there in the tool room. And he made the ejector for me, and he was the smart son of a gun. So he fixed my rifle. But I don't have that, and I had a.210 gauge. I don't have that. That nice Winchester, I paid $48 for that. It was a pump gun, pump gun, you know, five, six shots. And I went hunting down at Perryville one day. And usually we took the train down in the morning. It was a 7 o'clock milk train on 9th Street. Then it would come back at 5. So we went down there to hunt. And wherever we went down there, it was on a Sunday. I think it was Sunday. And we got chased out. The farmers chased us off of their land, you know. And I was so damn mad. I didn't wait for the 5 o'clock train. I walked the tracks back to Rockford. And I worked at the Grove Grocery. I went down to the store, and I said, I got a gun for sale. And I sold it for $10. That's the end of our hunting. But your dad, he found out about your hunting, though. Not that I know of. He knew you hide your rifles. You lived at home? Yeah. He didn't find out? No. Well, he died in 1920, you know. Yeah, but when you got the license, though, the first time, he was... You didn't want him to know, you said. Well, no, I didn't. But, of course, I got his citizenship papers now. He was 1904. That means he came here in 19... Well, he was here before that. Five years. He worked down in Stillman Valley on a farm. The name was Johnson. And he changed it to Strumquist because he got the mail mixed up down there. Another guy named Godfrey II Johnson, or Godfrey... You said that he worked seven days a week, your dad? Yeah. Was he able not to provide for his family and buy the house and make a good living? Or did he really have to work hard for it? Well, he did. He worked seven days a week. On Sundays, he was a day watchman down there, you know. Make the rounds, he had to punch a clock, like he used to do. Or don't you remember that? Yeah, sure, I do. So that's what he did on Sundays. He was never home then? Not very much. You saw him very little. Then he died in 1920. Fifty-eight years old. So he had a pretty tough life. Well, I guess he enjoyed it. I don't know. Now, you know, like Peterson Home, $10,000 to get in there, they tell me. So my mother broke... My brothers all got married. I didn't get married until 35. And I was the last one home. I peddled yeast in Rockford, so every noon I'd go home for lunch and see her. No matter what end of town I was in, I'd go home. But one day, Broadway, there was a woman come up to me, she said, You ought to be ashamed of yourself. I said, What'd I do now? She said, You don't even go home and see your poor mother. I said, What are you talking about? I go home every day. Well, that ain't the way I heard it. Well, I said, You heard it, but I don't care where I am, west side or east side, I go home every day for lunch. Have a cup of coffee and something. So I don't know where she got that. Oh, there was some woman that told her over at Salem Church. She belonged at Salem Church. And told her that I never came home. But my brother, he came home once a year to see her. And he worked at Greenlea's. We all worked, the three of us, they all worked at Greenlea's. And the one next to me, he just died there last year. Martin. Martin. And, you know, going to Greenlea's, she had to go up 11th Street every day, you know. Just once a year, if I see her? And that would be on Easter. And I come home for lunch and I would say in Swedish, Who do you think was here today? And I said, No. Oh, Mart was here. Isn't that wonderful? Because she talked Swedish, you know. Well, she told us it was the greatest thing in the world. He had been home to see her. But you came every day? Every damn day I was there. You didn't live at home then? Oh, sure. You lived at home too? Oh, sure. Oh, sure. Until 35 then when you married? Yeah. I see. So she remembered it. She died in 43. So she remembered he came once a year. It was a big thing. Oh, yeah. But you came here. Yeah, honest. But then there's an old biddy saying that I never went home to see her. Well, hell, I had a truck and I'd park it right there, you know. Oh, it's funny things. And we had boarders upstairs there. You know, boarders, roomers if you want to call them. They didn't get their meals there because they ate at Vega Lodge across the street. They were serving food down there. Did you ever? Joshua Vega, yeah. They were good food over there, very reasonable, you know. They did a hell of a business. Cooperative Cafe, I think they called it. That's what they called it. They had a lot of members, the Temperance. Oh. But otherwise there was not too many Temperance's. You know, big North Sea Albin? Yeah. He was dead. You knew him then. North Sea Albin. He lived in a flat. Why did they call him North Sea Albin for? Well, his last name is North Sea. His first name was Albin. He lived in 1220... Nuford. Huh? Nuford. In Swedish, Nuford. Oh, Nuford, yeah. Streamtwig would be my name or River Branch. He lived in that two-story flat on 15th Avenue there. We lived on the corner, see. We lived in 1227 first. We lived down 2nd Avenue. When we moved in there, we couldn't get any water, city water. We had a cistern, so we boiled the water and we drank that. So there was no water in some of the areas in Nuford? No, no. Well, this was after... Oh, but everybody had an outhouse. Yeah, most everybody. Well, if they didn't, what did they do then? Yeah. Go to the neighbor? I guess so. There were no gas stations. Yeah, no. Where did you buy gas for your corn on 1920, for instance? Were there many gas stations? No, there wasn't many. Let's see. Where the hell did I? Oh, let's see. I don't know, Big Ed Johnson. I don't know if he was in business at that time or not. Brin Oil Company over on Parmley Street. Brin, B-R-Y-H-N, Brins, which sold gas there. You never ran out of gas? I don't think so. Model T Ford. You always had gallon cans with you, you know, good stuff. You know, I didn't use... No, I wasn't bootlegging, hell with that. You could use it in a feud for the cars. Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah, porting a tank, maybe that... I never knew that. Because that's who... This housekeeper I had lived up, you know, had a room upstairs during the building of Camp Grant. We had a lot of boarders, roomers and boarders. They wouldn't eat there. They were roomers. They didn't eat down. But we had carpenters come out from Chicago. They lived there. Three or four of them lived there, upstairs. How much did they pay then, $5 a week? $4, I think, or something. So there was a good exchange coming up, too. I couldn't get a job when they were building Camp Grant. I went out there, tried to get a job in the waterboy, you know, but I was too small. I was real short. I grew up all of a sudden. I never got the job there. I used to carry newspapers, evening paper and morning paper. Yeah, but the waterboy, you didn't have to be tall to be a waterboy. I know, but that's the excuse they gave me. They didn't hire me. And your brother Martin, did he have any problems? Who? Martin, the one that was looked upon at Ellis Island as not desirable. Oh, yeah. No, he just passed away now, last year. Yeah, I guess so. And his sickness never appeared again, no problem? No, I guess he had bronchitis maybe when he was, whatever it was. I don't know what they call it in Swedish, but how could they tell that? I could never figure that one out. It's just like Flagshman, I could see the grocery stores going out of business there. So they told you that? What? That the grocery stores were going out of business. Oh, yeah, the company, you know. They knew that? In the late years, because I got out of the peddling east in 1962. Was it starting to get bad then? The what? The grocery stores had already started to fall out. Well, the company said that it would happen. So when I decided to leave, I was working with Sig Lee. And so, you know, have a franchise deal like that, see? You know, we'd say we'd buy the trucks and we'd rent the place and pay our own bills, telephone and everything. Oh, no, they weren't thinking that. Oh, no, no. Two weeks later, that's what happened. The company had it all set up. So it didn't have any branch agency. See, we had branch agency here. So then the guy got it, well, he's got his warehouse now between Cherry Valley and Belvedere. So Fleishman, they were a big company? Oh, yeah. Original, I guess, yeast company, the biggest. So you worked there for four years for them? Did you ask for a pay raise when you wanted something or did they just gave it to you? No, no, I usually had to ask for it. Did they gave it to you? Well, sometimes, I guess. I started for $80 a month. Oh, yeah, and I was getting $120 a month at Globe Grocery. And I quit that and went to work for $80 a month. I never told my mother that either because she'd had a fit. But I wanted to get out of the grocery store. So I started with Fleishman, $80 a month. 1922. But then you could do all the dancing on Saturday and Sunday. But it didn't last long. And I went to work. What the hell? I'm mixed up. Oh, let's see. I went to Greenlees. Did you ever know? You lived here a long time? I went to Greenlees, yeah. Bernie Norlander? Yes, I was. At the grocery I worked for Pat Eck and Bernie Norlander, 622 7th Street. Working in a store, I couldn't go out to the kids or trays on the counter. They had eggs in, price on them. Well, I ordered the meat that this woman wanted. I was waiting for them to get that ready. I saw the eggs there, so I took a pencil. I wrote on some of the eggs, you know. This is a rotten egg, bad egg, elated 1912 and all kinds of stuff, you know. And then I turned them over so you wouldn't see them. But they sold, some woman come in and bought eggs. And the damn fools, in a paper bag, you just put them in, you know, if you want half a dozen or a dozen. Because they had it right on the counter in trays. And this woman got some of those eggs. And she called up and she said, your eggs are rotten enough without you having to mark them. That's what they told me in the butcher shop. Well, right away, who the hell did they blame for doing it? Me. Well, you did it too. I did it, but how did they know? They put me in a gunny sack and hung me up on a hook in the cooler. I damn near froze to death. No. Sure. Oh, God. That was funny. So you were a rascal. Oh, yeah, hell yes. This Mr. Nolando, he probably had the point, you know, he'd pick you up direct from one work and take you over to another once you didn't get a chance to do any of those foolish things. He had a point. He was all right, but it was one Christmas Eve too, you know, Christmas Eve, Swedes, that's a big time. And we'd be open, you know, seven, nine o'clock. Of course, he went up to the club, John Erickson Club right there. Republican, John Erickson. Yeah, up there. I don't know what he'd do, play cards or what, but so Christmas Eve, he'd go up there, you know, and here we were keeping the store open. It was seven, nine o'clock or something, you know. So, hell, I got disgusted, and I told the other guys, I said, I'm not staying here any longer. I'm going home. Christmas Eve. The store was open. You would think the store would close early, though, on Christmas Eve, so everybody got inside. Globe Grocery did not close early. They didn't? No, sir. But they were never open on Sunday, though? No. So, I got disgusted, and I told the other guys, I'm going home. It's Christmas Eve. So, I get home, and Verney called me on the phone. Why did you go home? You didn't wait for your money. And two weeks before Christmas, two weeks or three weeks, we worked every night till 10, 11 o'clock, selling lutefisk, Christmas trees, and all that stuff, you know. We had Christmas trees we sold out in the back. You sold Christmas trees, too? Oh, sure, and lutefisk, and herring, and vinegar. And so, he said, you should have waited for your Christmas present. I said, no, it'll keep till Monday. So, I got $5 for work. What was it, $10? I think it was $5, and I worked three weeks before Christmas, every day of night till 10, 11 o'clock. Big Christmas present. So, you said the Christmas present we keep, but we better sell the eggs. No, I didn't mention any eggs. He wasn't involved in that. I hope, I don't know, but the butcher knew about it. So, you were well-known down there on 7th Street then? Oh, I think so. 6th or 7th Street? 622. How about Alain Malquis now? He was the egg king. Malquis, yeah. Malquis. You knew him? Oh, sure. Yeah, he's a big guy, boy. He made it pretty good. Yeah, you know. He was peddling eggs during the Basketball. Yeah, great guy. Upstairs over Globes was that flop house. Erickson, Dr. Erickson? Yes. Do you remember him? Yes. Or his mother? No, I don't remember her mother. Well, they had roomers up there at the hotel right above the store. It was just one big room with cots and you pay a quarter or fifty cents and you sleep there at night. Overnight? Uh-huh. They called it the flop house? Yeah. Well, I did. I mean, twenty-five cents a night and there were no partitions or anything. Just like camping cots that you slept on, you know. You had a hell of a lot of guys up there sleeping for two bits or a half. And, of course, that was right over a store, right over Globes. And in the summertime, you know, breakfast foods has a tendency of getting buggy, you know. They still do sometimes. Of course, those stores are refrigerated. They're cool now, but we didn't have no air conditioning in those days. So, it happened the toilet upstairs where they had all these roomers run all over the floor up there, you know. They'd get wet up or something. And, of course, we had all our breakfast foods on that side in the store on shelves, you know, the whole length. And water just poured down there, you know, from the damn toilet overrunning and soaked up all this cream of wheat and the cornflakes, oatmeal, and any breakfast food you could think of, you know. So, Bernie Norlander said, As soon as you can dry out a little bit, will you pack all that stuff in boxes? And I said, Yeah. I didn't know what he was going to do with it, so what did he do? He had boxes and we took them all upstairs. He charged them for the breakfast food, and then, of course, they could serve them up there to the roomers. They had good flavor to them. Oh, God. You know, we had so damn much fun, but that's what he did, honest to God. So, he was the owner and... Bernie Norlander, yeah, and Pat Eck. So, he didn't want anything to go to waste? Huh? Nothing went to waste? No, you're damn right that nothing went to waste. But isn't it strange, though, when you go into a store today, you know, Yeah. You know, there's this stamped date on, expiration date. Yes. You never had that in your... No, of course not. Well, there were eggs, though, 1912. Oh, yeah, that was in the meat market. But then the farmers would come in, you know, with dairy butter. You know, a lot of farmers made butter, country butter, and the women would come in, you know, crazy for that. They'd bring in crocks, 2-pound, 3-pound crocks of butter, you know, that they made on the farm. And some of it was good, and some of it wasn't fit to grease wagon wheels with, you know. It was too old? Well, it'd be ran... I don't know if it was too old or what, but it didn't taste right. So, we had wooden dishes. Oh, they were like real thin wood. That's why we'd dish it out. They brought them in in these stone crocks, you know, 3 pounds, 5 pounds or whatever. And then we had a wooden spoon, and we'd, you know, dish it out of there in these trays, weigh it, and sell them. And some of it was, like I said, unfit to grease. And some of these old... I knew which women were so damn fussy, you know. Oh, they wanted the best, you know. And they wanted to sample the butter before they bought it. So I'd just break off a little part of their stish that was coming, you know, and then you'd take a little. And oh, some of it was good, and for one, they'd spit and sputter, you know. And, of course, I knew who they were, so I'd let them taste the worst butter I had. Because I knew the farmers had brought the good butter, and the farmers said it wasn't so good. But I'd let them taste that, and they'd spit, and, oh, I can't do that. Give me some of my creamery butter. Ha ha ha! So it wasn't all dull. Ha ha! How could you get rid of that bad butter, though? Well, I don't know what the hell we did do with it. I guess threw it out. That I don't remember. But because some of it wasn't fit to eat, hell no. How could you keep the egg in the heat in the summer? You had the... Eggs? Eggs. Because they wouldn't last long in this heat, 90, 95. Oh, yeah. Well, eggs. You had the ice... Eggs was in the meat market. That's where I... Oh, you didn't sell the eggs then? Let's see. I don't think we did. Eggs. Why? They weren't in the meat market. Well, anyway, this tray was, the wire tray that was on the top of the counter, when I saw them there, and... You were a fast rider. Yeah. Ha ha. But I guess we had eggs, too, for sale. What the hell. Oh, sure we did. Farmers would bring in eggs. Yeah, they bought them. Yeah, and then we'd just put them in a bag. Funny they didn't all break. You got them with the egg, though, that I remember. Yeah, yeah. And vinegar. We had that in big barrels, you know. Big, great big barrels. And then we'd get, they'd buy vinegar by the gallon. A lot of people would. What did they use that for? Vinegar? Boutique? Oh, for pickling and canning and stuff like that. We had cider vinegar and white vinegar. That was a big seller. Pretty good. Not too big, but we did. And then gallon jugs. They'd buy it by the gallon. These stone crocks, mostly stone crocks, not glass gallon jugs. And the barrels were in bags, and the wooden faucet on, you know. So it took a while to fill up the jug. So you'd turn the faucet on, in the meantime go up and wait on somebody else, you know. And then before you'd come to it, you had vinegar all over the damn floor, because it had run out. I did that more than once. This is kind of old. You figure out after a while there was no joke kind of egg. You know what eggplants are? Yes. They're good. I guess. I never knew what they were. Did you? What? What do you mean you didn't know what they were? I know. I never knew what to do with them or anything. You slice them and fry them. You sold them though. Well, I got to tell you that, because I didn't know. So a lady come in one day, and she saw the eggplants there, you know. I didn't know. I guess the first time maybe I'd seen them in a store. I don't know what happened. But before that, I asked, I guess, Berge or one of the other clerks. I said, what the hell, what do you call these? What do you call them? Oh, those are blue balls. I didn't know any difference, you know. So blue balls. This woman come in, and she said, oh my, aren't they nice. How much are they today? So I didn't know, you know. So I yelled way back, hey, how much are the blue balls today? And Bernie come up. He said, what do you mean? What's the matter with you? Why did you do that? I said, isn't that the name? Oh, he said, of course not. He said, who told you? And I told him, and boy, did he give him hell for telling me they were blue balls. Oh, not a dull moment. And peaches, you know, for canning season, the women would come in and squeeze the peaches, you know. And Bernie didn't like that. So he'd say, hey, why don't you go over and squeeze the coconuts a while? I'll stand here and squeeze the peaches for you. That's a bad idea, people have, you know, to squeeze everything. That's right. Did you know Bergie then, Norlander? Oh, that was his brother. His nephew. He just died, you know, not long ago. So now when you were in this store here, helping the people to get what they wanted, did they talk Swedish then most of the time? Oh, some of them. A lot of them did. So you had to use both English and Swedish? Oh, sure. I could do it. The blue balls in Swedish, what do you call them? Eggplants, and I didn't know that. Well, he told me, I'd never seen them before. What the hell? But there were some things, you know, like eggplants, or the blue balls. Yeah. You didn't have a Swedish name for it. Not that I know of. No. So then you used the English name. Yeah. Then you talked Swedish. Yeah. Yeah, I talked Swedish, yeah. What? Yeah, but I mean, there are certain things you can translate. Oh, no. Yeah. We don't have them in Swedish. Yeah. We don't have blue balls in Swedish. Yeah. And then, what the hell, we had a ladder, you know, and a railing. Were you ever in a grocery? Oh, you weren't around. No, I didn't know how it looked like. A rail, you know, a step ladder so you could, the shelves were way up to the ceiling, you know. Way up to the ceiling. So a woman came in one day and she wanted some washing powder. Well, you know, there was a hell of a lot of washing powders, naphtha, washing powder. And soap. And soap. Well, the soap we had down below. In this slow cellar we had on the top shelf. And the name of the washing powder was Piles Perlene. Piles Perlene was the name of the washing powder. So this guy gets up on the ladder, way up there, you know, and she didn't know what kind of washing powder she wanted, you know. So he was naming different ones off. And then she said, Oh, have you got piles? And he said, What the hell, we got a hole in these pants too? Because he had piles. And she wanted piles of Perlene washing powder. Oh, nuts. So that was a real circus. Oh, yeah. Whatever a dull moment. We had a lot of fun. Thank God we didn't. Long hours, but a lot of fun. And the dogs pissed on the lutefisk outside, you know. Did they do that? You're damn right they did. The dogs, yeah. And what made it better, because we had it in bundles right on the sidewalk. In a barrel? Yeah, well, some of it just wrapped not in a barrel, it was just wrapped in bunches like cordwood, you know. Yeah, but people saw that though. Huh? People saw that. Well, I know, but what the hell, to get lutefisk ready, you got to soak it in lime and ashes and all that stuff, you know. My mother used to soak it. I know, but if people saw a dog urinating. They'd get flavored it. So they didn't object to it? No. Well, hell, if they did, they'd still buy it. Of course, it was in front of all the grocery stores on 7th Street. Lundquist, and sometimes the dogs wouldn't do it, and sometimes they did. But what the hell, everybody knew it, and they'd still buy it, and take it home and soak it in ashes and lime and crap. How much lutefisk do you think you sold there for Christmas? Oh, quite a bit. Big bundles. Hell of a lot of it. You never soaked it? Oh, yeah, we had it soaked, too. In the store, too? Oh, yeah. And you'd be damn careful to get the water off of there, and then wrap it up half a dozen times in heavy paper, and still it'd leak out the time they got home with it. Oh, God. You should have had wax bags, but you didn't have those those days. Well, you could have put it under the flop house, you know. Yeah, right. Flop house. Oh, God. So it was on 7th Street? Yes, 622. 622. Yeah, it was sometimes. And Hank Sanders, he went around and took orders. Yeah, but here I wonder now, nowadays people are going, they are so careful, you know, they pick everything and they look and they put it back when they order from him, now Sanders, they had no choice. When he came with the bag, all they had to do was to take it, even if it was bad butter, you know, they had to take it. Now, wait a minute, wait a minute. I'm talking about Hank Sanders, he was the guy who went to the houses and took the orders. You know what I mean? Yeah, but he didn't have anything with him. That's what I mean. Yeah. When he come back with the bag. So he'd come back with the orders, see? Yes. And then we had to put them up. I know. And then we had to drive or deliver them with a horse and wagon. You just think now if you have put in a bundle of bad butter, you know, it tastes, everybody spit off, and you put it in to that customer. Yeah. He couldn't refuse it. Yeah. What happened? I don't know. Well, if it was hot, I don't know what the hell I did. No, but you remember, you know, when you got so many different kind of butters. Yes. Some was bad, you knew that. Yeah. Some ladies came in and they... Yeah, take it and spit and spit it. Yeah, and if you have given one horse like that, that ordered through the Berger here. Yeah. They would never have a chance to take it back. No. Did they do that? Well, I don't know. Are you saying anything then? I don't remember. Maybe so I don't remember that, but... Speaking in French or something like that. How did you learn that piece? Oh, he's just turning around. My neighbor, huh? I don't know, but... You did a lot of singing, though, when you went around the store. Not too much singing. Huh? Not that I know of. Oh, but people were singing and whistling more than that. You never hear that. Oh, yeah. Don't you remember the years ago? Singing? Yeah, everybody was singing, you know, or whistling. Oh, yeah, yeah. Whistling And rats in the basement. Jesus Christ, they were that big, you know. I hated to go down there. I had to go down a step, you'd open the cellar door, and they'd be right up on the steps. Waiting for you. And we had cheese, you know, that comes in big round, in wooden boxes, round. And hell, they'd chew through the boxes. Oh, the wood wasn't very thick. It was plywood, but it was 60 pounds of cheese in a box, two 30-pound big ones, see? And the rats would even get into the cheese, you know. I hated to go down in that damn basement. They'd run along the steam pipes and all over. God damn it, I hated to go in the basement. And there was no way to get out of them? I never did. Boy, I didn't like that. There was never any checking up by the health department, for instance, going around in those days? Evidently not. And now, like, there's a damn important down-to-club, you know, for our kitchen and our bar and clean towels and all that stuff. And it cracks under the door to go outside. What the hell do they do? By God, I've got to get a hold of the mayor. What do they do now? They serve meals on the sidewalks on East 8th Street. Is that sanitary? Is that what they do? Sure, right at State and Madison, right on the sidewalk. You sit out there. They've got card tables there, and it's already set up. And you eat outside down at the bistro on North Madison Street, or Water Street. But you can't have a crack in the door? No, we didn't get that much against us, you know. And towels, you've got to have paper towels back at the bar. Oh, Jesus, it's so goddamn fussy. Someday I hope I see the goddamn doctor and tell him how sanitary things are. I'll tell the mayor if I ever see him how they can allow that when it's so damn fussy with clubs. And I used to go into all the restaurants, and for Christ's sake, most of them I didn't want to have a cup of coffee in, because I had to go in the kitchen and bakeries and all over. So you were picky then when you were sitting over there? No, but I mean, what the hell, if you see what's going on, just like Apple Home and Nystad, they had a bakery on Broadway. And Snooze Johnson, you didn't know him, or did you? No. Well, he was a baker, but he was drunk all the time. And they had a brother, David. Well, he was drunk too. And bakers, as a rule, they drink like hell. And so then the baker wouldn't show up at night for a baker. They called me. Hey, my baker didn't show up. Get me a helper. Somebody fill in. Get somebody, other baker that wasn't working, because I had a list of them also. Day or night, then I'd go out and try to get them to go over and help them out. Well, so this Apple Home and Nystad had a bakery in 1200 Block on Broadway. And a woman came in there one day, and Snooze Johnson was working there. And she says, I was in here the other day, and I got a loaf of peanut bread, and was it good. Have you got another one? I like that so much. She went back there, the girl, you know, and said, Hey, have we got any peanut bread left? And the baker says, Peanut bread? What are you talking about? We never made any peanut bread here. So come to find out, Snooze had been drunk, you know, and he heaved in a dough, but he still made it up and asked for salience. Because the store girls didn't know that. So that's how peanut bread. Oh, Jesus. No, you didn't know Snooze Johnson. Oh, God damn it. And I lived on 9th Street and 15th Avenue, and every day, he finally, he even got hit on 15th Avenue by a car, or he might be living yet, because, you know, he was like petrified. And his brother, Dave Johnson, he was a carpenter, a pretty good one if he was sober. So I had him fix my garage door over there. And I don't know, it took him six months, I guess, to fix the door. And I went, like I said, I went home for noon every damn day with the truck, no matter where I was. And he'd be waiting for me. He wanted 25 cents for a shot and a box of snuff. Every day I went home, he was there, and I never turned him down. So you had to pay him off every day. I did. I didn't refuse him, but that's what he was doing. But then he went and died, and then his brother came over and carried it on. Oh, Jesus. So you had a longer road, though? We had some. To travel? Yeah, that's right. So you were seeing a lot of the old-timers then in Rockport? Oh, boy. And they all had different names? Yeah. Snooze Johnson? Snooze. Cricket? Oh, you remember Cricket? Yeah. First, Scoog and Erickson. Cricket, yeah. Yeah, Scoog and Erickson. Why did they call him that for? I don't know. I never found out. Frank Clashen on Broadway. He was a big German. They never said the last name, then? There was always a nickname connected with the name? Yeah, most of them. Ivan Johnson. Oh, and what the hell was his name? They had Rockview Bakery. Not Street, but I know it so damn well. Erick, Erick, Erick Friedin. He had a bakery right there on Broadway. If you're coming from 8th Street or 9th Street, you go under the viaduct and then there's a little bakery there. I come in there about in years.