 We have today 9th of March 1987 and I'm sitting together with Burdett Harvey Carlson in Rockford, Illinois. He was born in Rockford, 14 November 1914, and is a former vice president and corporate secretary of National Lock. Burdett Carlson. Your parents now, Gustav Carlson and your mother was Gertrude Harvey. She was born in Rockford, but your father was born in Sweden. Right. You don't know the particular place where he was born? No, I can't lay my hand on everything fast enough. Nesum was probably the place that your father came from. Yeah, I think that's close enough. And when he came here then to this country, how old was he then? Oh, about 18 or 19. So he married here in Rockford, Illinois. That's right. Married a neighbor, lived in the area up by Sinsippi Park. And his first job when he came here, was he a furniture? Well, no, he got into the carpentry business and built homes, started out, you know, and then stayed with that for quite a while. Built a lot of homes in Rockford. And then from there he went into the furniture factory and started to do cabinet making, finishing, polishing and all that, and then got into the upholstering of dining room chairs and all that. And then he came so that he was in charge of shipping. And when he was over at the big factory, they employed several thousand people. Was there Rockford? Yeah, Rockford Furniture Company. Was 7,000 people? No, several thousand. Several thousand. Yeah, yeah. And he had charge of shipping and all the cabinet makers and all the finishers and all the upholsters and all the crating and shipping and receiving. So he was like right assistant. Was he ever a superintendent? Well, almost. He's an assistant to the superintendent, really. And because at his height he had 18 upholsters, just upholstering nothing but dining room chairs and that, you know. And they made dining room furniture, occasional chairs, some bookcases, and very little bedroom set. They got into a little of that. And then as the furniture business changed, of course, then they got into making radio cabinets for the radio people. That was a big business. That's when the furniture factories first started to automate a little bit. Up to that time, everything was done by hand. So it was almost like it was in the late 1800s then. In other words, they didn't change anything until— I'd say probably in the 30s probably they started to get into a little automation. Because then the furniture was moving south. At that time Rockford was number two next to Grand Rapids for furniture in the United States. But then the south started to make cheaper furniture. And they found ways to spray the furniture instead of—in the old furniture factories, they would stand for a whole day. Those old Swedes would stand and rub by hand. They had arms on them that were tremendous. And then that would be put aside, and then the next day they'd have to be a thin coat and then rub by hand again. So you see it took many days to build that furniture. So it was too many hours to— That's right. Well, then the south got in, and they started to sell the furniture cheaper. And they came in with automatic spray booths where they didn't even polish it or anything. They just sprayed it, and it was beautiful. And that's what hurt the furniture factories here. Then one by one they died down. Then the Depression came in, and they didn't keep up on the maintenance. And pretty soon one would close up, and then a little while later another one would close up. So you then came into this world here in Rockford and went to school here in high school? Went to school, went to high school, and during the Depression days I worked for my father out there for a dollar a day and swept the floors in the furniture factories. That would be my job, to sweep all them floors all the time. A dollar a day I got. And then I got through high school, and of course it was Depression. I couldn't afford to go on college because you just couldn't— You had intention to go on college? Oh, yeah, but I couldn't. Depression, my folks had no income for three years, no income. And yet he worked at the furniture factory and went out there. No income? No, he'd carry the check in his pocket because there wouldn't be enough money in the bank to cash the check. So that's the way the top men in the furniture factory worked, and then they paid some of the fellows that worked for them, see? So we were very limited on money, and we had to disconnect the telephone, and we had to be a little bit careful. When I went to school, if I had a quarter, that was something. So when I got through school, I figured, well, if I can't go to college, I've got to go learn a trade. So I went and applied at National Lock and got a job working the last year before I graduated, working nights, because National Lock had a night shift that worked all night. And I got a job working there at nights while I was going to school. And I was a hard worker, and I was faithful, never missed any days. And when I got through, I told them, I said, well, when I graduate, I want to come back and try to get a work here. So when I got through, I went back there, and in the meantime, I had taken in high school, I had taken drawing and some artwork and mechanical drawing, they called it. So I went up and got to have an interview with the man who was vice president and office manager of National Lock. Didn't know him. And just went in and told him that I had worked here the summer before, upstairs at the night shift, and that I couldn't afford to go to college, I didn't have the money, but I would like to go to work for National Lock, because I knew they had good training program in the tool and die making, they had a good training program in the machine shop, and they had some young engineers. And I remember this vice president saying, well, what do you think you can do? And I says, well, I'm willing to do anything. I said, I can show you some of the drawings I did in school. I know they don't mean much to this big company, but in my little humble way, this is what I did in school, and you can see I got A's on all of them, so I would like to start in your engineering department if I can. I'm not concerned about how much money I make. I just want a job. This is going to be my education. And the vice president turned to me and he says, I like your attitude. He said, I'll tell you what I'm going to do. He says, you're not going to start in the engineering department. He says, it's very hard to get a job, you know, it's depression. But he says, I'm going to put you in a tool room and start you out as a tool room apprentice. And once you learn to be a tool and die maker, then you can work into different things. Someday you can come in the engineering department. Well, I said, thank you. I appreciate that. And that's how I got started at National Arc. And that was in 1933? 1933 I worked there in the summer. 1934 I started permanently in a tool room. And of course everybody looked at me when I come in and wanted to know, how did you get a job here? I can't get my son in here. And the dad worked in a shop somewhere. So nobody helped you in there? You went by yourself? That's right. How did you know about National Arc? Now you talked to some other people that were working there? Well, pretty much everybody had either worked at Locke Company, their mother had worked at Locke Company, their father had worked at Locke Company, or their brother or sister. All the Swedes that came to National Arc, they hired all kinds of Swedes. Some of them couldn't even talk English at first. And my aunt had worked there. My uncle, he had some relatives that had worked there. And my dad had been buying a lot of equipment from National Arc. When he was with the furniture factory, he bought screws and locks and hinges and continuous hinges from National Arc. And he says, well son, if you're going to go for an apprentice program, go to National Arc, because they've got the largest and the finest tool room in the city of Rockford. So that's what I did. Well, in our height, we had as many as 25 in the apprentice program. We had a tool room that normally ran around 125, 130 tool makers. And there was nothing like that in Rockford. And they had a training program, see. But it was depression time when I went there. And I think the only reason I got in there was that I had worked in the summer upstairs at nights for little or nothing and had been faithful and just I think I humbled myself enough to them and told them that I wasn't interested in how much money I could make. I was interested in getting an education there. And I said, this has got to be my college degree. Well, from that, I worked my way all the way up to become vice president, corporate secretary, assistant secretary of Keystone Steel and Wire. They were the one that bought National Arc. And then I became corporate secretary of Waterloo Metal Stampings in Canada, Kitchener, Ontario, which employed about 550 people. That was another company we had, run independent. So I did a lot of flying at that time because we had our own corporate plane and everything. And we would have board meetings up there. We'd have board meetings in Peoria. We had them in Rockford. So I did a lot of traveling and a lot of going. So you went from the basement, so to speak. Lowest job you could have. But they had some shaky, not beginning, because it was started in 1903 by Levin Faust, B.I. Peterson. No, they had a serious strike, and I can't remember just when that was. That was just before I started. And then they had a strike after I had started there, but they all got settled. But, yeah, they had some slowdowns because, you see, I have to tell you how I left the tool room. I worked in the tool room, and there were no unions. And they were getting a little busy at Law Company, so they asked me if I'd work on Saturday. And some of the machinery they had in the tool room wasn't always the best. Some of it was old machinery, and there was an old surface grinder there. And I was working one Saturday morning, and I had had trouble in the morning where this machine had taken that part and threw it against the window. It kind of frightened me, being a young man. So I thought, Boy, I've got to be a little careful with this machine. And what it was, it had an electric magnetic table that went back and forth. And when I turned on the electricity on it, it was shorted. And once in a while, when the wheel would hit that piece, it would just throw it if it wasn't connected properly. Well, then later on I was working on it, and I had run the piece of machinery over, and I was going to test the piece I had on there to see that the electric was holding it. And I got this finger in the grind wheel, and it cut this one off here and this one across here. So, you know, there was nobody, no doctors on duty then because it was Saturday. So they took me up to the hospital, and they were going to take this finger off here and this one off here. And I ended up that they didn't take them off. And you see, I've got them now, and I pleaded with them because at that time I was playing in a church orchestra and another orchestra that was down on 7th Street. And as a result of that, there was no unemployment compensation. There was no medical insurance. There was nothing in those times. But the company said, well, we'll pay the doctor bill, see, because I got hurt on a job. Well, then I couldn't work right away. I had to be home with this, and it had liquid in it. So I'm sitting home one day, and the employment manager came over, and he says, well, do you think you could come to work and help us out a little bit because a couple of the men left that take care of the mail route. And National Lock was six stories high, and it laid about on three blocks square. It's huge. And we had a full-time man that would go around and deliver the mail. That was an eight-hour-a-day job. And they had either fired him or he had quit or something, and they didn't want to go out and hire anybody. And they knew I was home, and I wasn't getting any pay, but they were paying the doctor bills. And I said, sure, I'll be glad to come to work. I got my left hand, you know. I can pick up the mail and go deliver it to a foreman and sort it out and give it to him. So I went up there, and I did that for a whole month while these fingers were healing. I carried the mail around. Well, then there was another man who had become office manager, and he knew I had worked there. And he says to me, he says, do you want to come in the office and take over our mail room? Well, I says, I don't know. I said, I got to talk to my parents about that. And also, it would be less money than I was getting down the tool room, and I wasn't making much in the tool room. And I said, I'll let you know tomorrow. I'll talk to my parents. Because I had planned to be there four years to go through this program. So I went home and talked to my parents about it, and they said, well, you're going to have to make that decision yourself, and it's up to you which way you think you can go. So I made up my mind. I'd go back, and I'd talk to this man, and I said, yes, I'll forego the tool room if you promise me that when I take over the mail room that I don't have to be there all my life, that when you see that I've learned it and when there's another opening, I want to move on to the next job. I want to get a training. If you let me, if I can prove myself, I want to be able to have all these different jobs in this office, work myself up to be the supervisor of each one. I want to get into accounting. I want to be the supervisor of accounting. I want to get into inventory. I want to be the supervisor of inventory. I want to get into purchasing. I want to get into order writing. I want to get into all of the things. He said to me, he says, well, if you come to work, I'll promise you that if you do a good job, we'll give you every opportunity that comes along. I said, all right, I'll take it. Well, I got kind of ridiculed down at the tool room from my friends down there. They said I was chicken, taking that job up there for less money, and now you'll be nothing but a pencil pusher the rest of your life. I said, well, maybe so. So I took the job. From there I worked into I was the office boy, and I would come there at 6 o'clock in the morning and open the mail, and I would get in my little Model A, and I'd drive down to the old Rockford Post Office and pick up all the mail, take it out to National Lock, and be there at 6 o'clock and sit and open all the mail and distribute it to all the people in the office. And then I would pick up the mail and things like that. There was a couple other young girls that were helping. Well, I did that for a long time, and then pretty soon F.G. Hoagland, who was the president and also the vice president, A.J. Stranquist, they started to call on me to run errands. We didn't have a company car, but I would drive the president's little Chevrolet Coupe, and I'd have to go take his wife to the hospital or whatever she was on some program. And then the vice president, I would take his wife when she was pregnant with the first child to the doctor, and I'd run errands to the bank, and I'd go down to the bank and get money and things like that, and I used to go down there and get $2,000 cash and put it in a brown envelope and throw it in the front seat of my Model A, drive along 7th Street, no guard with me or nothing, and when I'd get back, I'd count the money. Sometimes it was $20 short. I'd just call the bank and say, you know, you cheated me out of $20. Well, okay, when you come down tomorrow, we'll give it to you. So tomorrow I'd get it, see, and they'd take my word for it. And then other times I'd say, well, I got $50 too much once in a while, and I'd tell them I'd bring it back. That's the relationship we had with the bank. They used to be called the old Swedish-American Bank. So I did all those things. Well, then F.G. Hoagland got into some court problems, and I had to take he and the vice president to all these court trials, and I became like a personal messenger for them as well as working in the mail department. You get the inside track then. That's right, but I was always nice to them, and I was always available. They could call me at 10 o'clock at night. I'd do anything, see. And that's how I had opportunities, and they were good to me. So they were old in comparison to you and Hoagland. Oh, I was just a young boy, yeah. Because Stranquist, he started in 1914, and Hoagland, of course, was in the 1930s. But he had some trouble though in the 1930s. That's right, that's right. There was trouble. And then it was Mr. Stranquist had been a purchasing agent for years, and of course he knew the Keystone people real well. So when Lock Company was going to go up for sale, Yates suggested that probably they should consider buying it because we were Keystone's second largest customer. Well, customer. Sure. And they thought, boy, to buy that, that would be wonderful, see. So eventually it turned out that Keystone did buy National Lock. But before they bought National Lock, I had worked my way into the order department. Then I had worked my way into the accounts receivable, and then I had worked in the accounts payable. Well, then National Lock came in and bought it, and then I got involved doing a lot of accounting records for them and that because Mr. Stranquist handled all that. And then after that, I went from there. I went to accounts payable, and then I went up to closing the general ledger and closing the books and making the final statements for the month and the year. And then I went from there into inventory, and I controlled the inventory and did the final closing of inventory and working with the auditors, librarians, Montgomery, who would come in and do the audit. So you could stay a year or maybe a couple of years in each division and to learn the- Oh, one place I was in four years, but it was a big department. I worked in the department and then eventually worked up so that I became the manager of it. So I knew it well. They kept their word then? Oh, yes, they did. They were very good to me. How was he able to keep it during the Depression, 1931, 1932, 1933? Well, I can remember when I worked in accounts receivable, it was tough then. Business was way down. But rather than to lay off people, he would come and he'd say- he'd always call me Mr. Carlson. Now, Mr. Carlson, we don't want to lay these people off, so why don't you tell them they can be off tomorrow and then just keep some of them working today and then the next day send those home and then have the others work. So we'd work every other day rather than lay people off. And that's the way we kept going, kept going. And then eventually it started to pick up again. And then, of course, when Keystone bought it, National Lock needed a lot of attention. Was Hoagland dead by then? Yes, he had passed away. 1938? Yeah. When he died, then they elected the board and Mrs. Hoagland, or Wortham was his daughter. She was the one that was a big stockholder. She appointed A.J. Strankwist to be the general manager because he's the one that had stuck with Mr. Hoagland. So he ran it, and when he was running it, he's the one that was instrumental in getting Keystone to buy National Lock. And soon as they bought National Lock, they made Mr. Strankwist president and general manager because it was through him that they got the company. And he ran that company and made a lot of money for them. In the meantime, they poured a lot of money into the company. They'd give him money to buy new equipment. We went outside and painted all the windows and fixed up things, you know, and the lock company got back in real good shape. Made a lot of money for Keystone. And then Keystone kept expanding, and towards the end there, Keystone had 28 subsidiaries, National Lock one of them, and then he had a lot of others. So it was a powerful operation. So they were the owner or the main owner during the war, Keystone? Yeah, yeah, yeah. They took it all before the war? Yeah, yeah. And at the war, right after the war, our highest employment was 4,600 people, 4,600. Was that during the war or after? Right after the war. So what kind of production did you turn into then during the war? Oh, during the war, we made all the ammunition boxes for all the men out in the field. That's right. We made all the locks for their ships and submarines. And then, well, I don't have them. See, if I had you all at the other shop, I could show you. We made a lot of parts for the carbine rifle. We made all the trigger housings and the casting for the triggers and the sights and all that. I have the second gun we ever made, and I have that mounted on the big board. Was that your specifications then from the government? Oh, that was all government specifications, sure. Your tool department took care of it? Oh, sure, sure, sure, sure. We did a lot of government work. So you had a tool department or tool and die makers that could do anything that they... Well, you see, why people like to work at National Lock was that because our tool and die work, when you worked in there, you got exposed to small things, big stampings, you got into die cast, you got into plastics, and the whole bit. When you worked at some of these other companies, they probably just made metal stampings. Or if you went into plastics plants, it was just plastics. But here you got all the variety. And so every time that we graduated, say, 15 or 20 from our apprenticeship program, those fellas could go anywhere in Rockford and get a job. But you see, as an outgrowth of that, a lot of them started their own companies. We had a service engineering down here, was a big tool and die company for many years. It's finally closed up. All of them have died off. And they employed something like 50, 60 men. That was a big tool. That all came out of National Lock. Rockford Screw Products came out of National Lock. Amrock Corporation came out of National Lock. Elco Tool came out of National Lock. Camcar came out of National Lock. Oh, I can name you so many companies. And they became competitors, though, wasn't it? Oh, sure. How was the feeling, though, between... Not too bad. We could never go in. You were big enough, though, so you didn't pay attention to them. They each had their own room for both. Now Amrock, of course, has taken over a lot of National Lock things and bought up. And we had good relations with the top people. See, the Aldeans worked at National Lock. And Swan Hillman that was out of Rockford Screw, he worked at National Lock. And so on his deathbed, he had left instructions that just Mr. North and I, that they were to invite us over and let us tour that plant, because nobody could use to get into Rockford Screw Products unless Ed North could, because he knew Swan Hillman just like that. But nobody else did. But, boy, he hadn't been dead more than a month, and they invited us over there for one whole day and took us around the plant, took us to lunch. So that was a secret place? Well, they kind of liked to keep their own little things, you know. Because we had a big fastener plant, too, you see. We made screw and bolts. That's how Lock Company got started. See, these were used in cabinets, and F.G. Hoagland developed a machine that would drill a hole, and all you did is drop this in and drill a hole in here and put the key in, and this was the lock for a lot of desks and pianos. And this is the very first one that... This is the first lock that Lock Company ever patented. And that was invented by... By Levine Foss. Levine Foss. So he was actually a... Inventor. Mechanic. Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah. 1903, see, that's when National Lock started, 1903. National Lock patented that. So that was the beginning. Yeah, yeah. And I can remember my dad talking, you know, that he would buy all these screws from National Lock, and the big item in those days was wood screws. I can remember working at National Lock, and it was nothing to ship a carload of wood screws. Down south, like the Thomasville Chair, that's a big furniture factory. A carload of wood screws. That's a lot of screws. Was there easy production? In other words, there was long... We manufactured them like peanuts, you know. And we made so many different things, you see. About 50% of our business was in the fastener business, which included automotive, all the automotive people, plus the refrigeration and all that. And the other 50% was in the hardware, plastics, and things like that, which goes into a multitude of things. So plastics came in after the war. You want to shut that off just a minute? The plastics, no. They came in after the war. Yeah, that's right. How did that take hold then? Was there any innocence? No, we got into the radio cabinets. Remember the first little plastic radio cabinets? And I remember we made some for Sears Roebuck. When they first came out with that little plastic radio and they had a handle on the top, you could carry it, you know. I thought that was Bakelite, though. That was Bakelite, they called it, but that was the beginning of plastics. The same thing. Yeah. And then Sears Roebuck had the refrigerator, and then we developed that Lucite ball. And the idea that Sears Roebuck, and we had developed that, you see, we would work with, like, the people who made it for Sears Roebuck were like Seeger Refrigerator in those days and Whirlpool is today. And we would work a year in advance with them on design. See, we had a big engineering staff, and we would design these handles to meet their specifications. And I remember when we developed that Lucite ball, it was perfectly round like a golf ball, and it stuck up on a handle. And the idea was Sears Roebuck wanted that when a woman was carrying all her plates and things in her hand, she could just hit that with her elbow and the door would open, see. Well, as an outcome of that plastic, we were developing to grind that, that is a perfect round ball, beautiful. Not a spot in it. We stumbled onto a magnifying glass as a result. A man took that and was grinding it, and all of a sudden he had one about that thick and beveled, and he noticed that it magnified. So we developed a magnifying glass that first started out on all these scales that you stand on and look at your weight. Yeah, those were our magnifying lenses. And they came out of that discovery? Oh, sure. And then we made all these little cracker jack things for cracker jack. We made thousands. Those little bitty trains and wagons and cars, you could hold a whole handful and there would probably be a hundred of them in there. We used to make those dies, they were this big, you know. And there was probably 50 on the die, and you'd stamp them out just like that, you know. We made everything. We made spotlights for the Model T Fords. We made spark plugs. We made gas savers. We made a card table clamp on things for cigarettes when they got to be popular and the women were playing cards. Then we made a thing you snapped on here and it had an ashtray. We made Venetian blinds. We made cocktail shakers. We made makeup lamps. Everything. So in the engineering department, were there any...? We had a big engineering department, a big research and development, and a big tool and die shop. Out of that 4,600 people, see. And they were all trained on the premises? Who were the teachers now for those engineers? Were they from MIT or...? No, no. They were just good old Swedes. One of our best superintendents, his name was called John Mouw. And all he did, he'd run around the shop with a rag hanging out of his back pocket and over here was a screwdriver and a pair of pliers, and he could fix anything. From the old schools, he learned it the hard way. That's how all them people did. That was only the last year that college graduates started to come in. Nobody came in during your last...? Oh, I hired. I worked in... I hired. I was office manager. I bought all the office furniture equipment and systems and forms and put all the systems in and used to hire all the office people and interview them. It just kept growing and growing and growing, and I could see how it was getting now that if you didn't have a college education, they weren't too much interested in you. It was impossible to come through there like I did. Things changed fast after. Is it better or worse? I hate to say, see, because I haven't been to college, but... This is side 2, cassette 1, cassette 2, continuation with Burdette Carlson, Rockford, Illinois, side 2. Things changed fast after. Is it better or worse? I hate to say, see, because I haven't been to college, but I'm for the old school. Do you think the practical way, in other words, is starting from the beginning? Oh, I think even if you got a college education, if I ran a big plant and if you come in with the finest college degree, I would start you at the bottom and work you through the program. But today they won't go for that, or they will...? They don't have the time. Don't have the time, see. They got to be in the high... Everything is in unions and production and quantities and quality, and everything is different today. You can't hold anything up, see. How did you come in now for the union, for instance? In other words, you were on the management. Did you belong to the union when they started? No. You were on the management side then. Yeah. When I worked in a factory, there was no union. They came in after the war, 1946? Yeah. And it was UAW. Did it go slowly, or how did they accept the workers? Well, it was close. It was close. It should never have really gone in, but I don't know the whole story of that. But as I remember, it was... Although they had good union relations. But you see, I'm not opposed to unions. I think unions are great if they're handled right. But in our case, it just kept... And we were tied in with the automotive unions. And you see, everything just went up, up, up. I remember when medical first come in. First we took care of just the doctor, Bill, and at the hospital. Well, then pretty soon it came you took care of the wife and then the kids. And then it got into the hearing problem, and then it got into glasses. And then it got into... you had so much sick leave. It just kept growing and growing and growing and growing. You had to build it into your costs, and the prices just went up and up and up. Terrible. So they turned the company over? Well, that's right. Although we were able to manage it, but that's, you know, at the end it got pretty bad. But the workers were not able to produce more of what they got. Well, some they did. They modified and improved the line. But you see, when you have a company like National Lock, those things are your own development and things that you've developed yourself. And it's, you know... You have to have the cost of it. That's right. That's right. Yeah, I remember seeing industrial engineers come into the picture. We never had them, and then all of a sudden we had them. Well, or you had more people on the payroll that you didn't used to have. And that's how things grew. But National Lock, they stayed in Rockford despite the furniture. They went on to October and went on to business. But they were able to stay here. They stayed in the furniture business. The union drove them out. That's right. But I remember when I was a vice president, each of the top officers would get an assignment that we'd... Like I'd get 10 big customers that I would have to go visit during the year. And my instructions from the president were, I want you to go at your own choosing, set up dates with them. I want you to go visit these customers and thank them for the business we give them. That's your only mission. You're not going there as a salesman because you don't know nothing about selling. We just want you to go. And I, being a vice president and a corporate secretary, I would always try to make my inroads to the corporate secretary of whatever company I went to. Then after once I'd met him, then I got to see the treasurer and probably the vice president. And I remember trip after trip that I made in those days that these people would tell me, not the young ones that I went to see, but the next generation up above that were still there, would tell me, you know, if it wasn't for National Act, we wouldn't be in business today. I said, how? Well, he says, you know, F.G. Hoagland carried us for a whole year when we couldn't pay any bills. I don't know how he did it. And Hoagland did that. He would never, you know, if there was some furniture, I remember going to Jasper, Indiana. It's nothing but furniture down there. Any number of those companies told me, if it wasn't for National Act, we wouldn't be in business today. Our grandkids have got National Act to thank for this. But he says, it don't mean nothing to them. It does to me. He says, we kept buying from you, even when you raised the price 10 cents. We never thought of going out and getting another quote. We owe that to you. But the young man sitting down in the purchasing today, he doesn't care about that. You know why? Because he's working now. He's a young man. He's been signed as purchasing agent. And he's told that if he can cut his cost by X number of dollars, he's going to get a $2,000 bonus. Now he goes home and tells his wife, you know, honey, I got a chance of making a bonus this year of $2,000. So when you come in with National Lock product and you say, well, now, we're going to have to up this price about 15 cents on this lock. You know what he does? He reaches down and he pulled out his drawer. And he says, you see that lock? It looks just like National Locks. And I said, yes. And he says, you know, I can buy that for 25 cents cheaper than you can sell me that lock. It's from Japan. I says, oh, I said, that's interesting. He says, I can't buy these locks anymore. He says, I don't care if they fall off. All we want to do is get them on the cabinets and get them out of here. See, then he makes his bonus. If he buys this one, he doesn't make his bonus. But this will last. This is brass plated, chrome plated, got good finishes. This is cheap. There aren't even any engineering drawings. They make these from pictures. That's what happened back in the 60s. You started in the 60s to deteriorate. Everything was, well, look, I can buy this from Japan. Same thing. Do you think people in general are less quality oriented today than they were about 50 years ago, for instance? Buying a piece of furniture or a lock or whatever it is? I think they're starting to come back to it. But I think we've gone through a period where they've, I've seen union people go in and they go to the hardware store and here's a plier for $2.25, union made in America. And here's one for $1.59 made in Japan. And that union man picks up the Japan one, walks away. But he would know the quality though. No. And yet he wants to get union wages. And that's what's hurting the business, some of it. That's what happened back in the 60s. Wouldn't you think he would care about the quality because the $1.25? Well, I suppose they both hold a nudge, you know. I don't know. But I don't know what you're going to use this for. I probably talk too much. I saw how women started to work. You see, I ran a big department in World War II. And I had 50 women working for me. They started to come in then or? That's right. That's right. When my wife, I met my wife at National Lock. And when she said that she was going to get married, she had to leave her job. F.G. Hoagland would not let anybody work after you were married in the office. Well, that was his rule. Yeah. Couldn't work. Married woman cannot work in the office. Because then you're taking another job away from somebody. So that was his philosophy. And that was true a lot of other places. So in World War II, I had girls working for me. And all her husbands went to the service. Some of them got married two weeks before they went in the service. And I'd say to this, some of them got pregnant, and then I had to let them be off. And they'd come back and work for me. And I'd say, well, now, I suppose when Joe comes back from the service, you're going to stay home with your child. No, my mother's going to take care of it. Well, I said, why are you going to have your mother take care of it? It's your child. Your mother raised you. Why should she raise your child? Well, my husband will be coming back, and we need the money. I said, no, he's going to get his job back at the same wages that he left. He's been promised that. He's not out of work. Yeah, but I know, but we want to buy a house, and we need to buy some furniture. I've got to work, too. That's how it started, World War II. And these women wouldn't leave these jobs. In those days, they only made probably $100 a month, but they didn't want to give that up. And the mothers were good. They said, oh, I'll take care of the child. You better stay and work. And that's how it got going. And I seen it develop year after year. These girls would not leave. Once in a while, a girl would leave, but very seldom. It takes a lot of workplaces away from the other people. It takes out in a factory, it takes a lot of workplaces away from men. No question about it. So the largest employment you had in Asherloch was close to 5,000? Mm-hm. 4,600. You were working there around the clock then? Three shifts around the clock, never stopped. How many acres of property is it down there on Harrison, where it was located? Well, gee, I don't know, but that one, one, two... Is it five floor? Yeah, the main structure is five floors, six floors, the main structure, the two corner ones. And then back off in the back it goes, some of them are three, some are four. And that's basically two square blocks each way. And then they had a great big power plant. We used to roll seven coal cars a day at that plant. Seven? Oh yeah, we had a big enough generator plant that in an emergency we could have furnished electricity to that whole end of town. See, we had our own wells and our own coal power plant. We made all our own electricity and everything, you know. Who developed that? Hoagland? Yeah, sure, it started from scratch, three or four guys. And building up more and more? Sure, sure, sure. So the oil was like an industrial plant also? I could talk a week for you on this. To B.H. Carlson, thanks, that's Bob. That's your son? No, that's my president. Oh, your president, I see. That was Bob Summer, that was just before I retired. And he sent me this because he knew I'd be interested. It says here, on August 1st, Bob Campbell, Gene Aspling, formed a business venture called Cam Car Products. This is written by Ray Carlson. It's beginning was most so-so, carefully glamor, three employees and 3,000 square feet of rental area. That's exactly what my boy is starting now, out there in the Lutz Park. Equipment and all, and then he goes on to tell about how he started and how good the Lord's been to him and how he developed this into the company it is today. Now he sent that to all his employees. Now that's a real man, that's a humble man. So then they feel participating in it in a different way than the... That's right, that shows he's humble, see. He's not proud, never was that kind of a guy. And I kept it because it's a coincidence because today my boy has four men working for him plus themselves. And we've got 3,000 square feet and we're building some high-tech equipment for the lock people. Doing a real good job, very busy. This Ray Campbell now, he was not a Swede? No, no. Only Carlson and Aspling were Swedish back then. There are so many now that went away for National Lock. You have the Aldean brothers of course. Amrock. And founded Amrock. G. was there for many, many years at National Lock. All the way from the beginning, I understand, 19... That's right, he had a brain. He was an inventor and... Why did he leave though? And wasn't it to build a bit... Did you ever talk with Ruben Aldean? Yes, I did. He was interesting, wasn't he? Yes. He didn't tell you about leaving at all? Well, he did... A lot of people... G. didn't want to leave. It took some time for him to convince him to leave. I mean, and I wonder too though because he came in 1910. Yeah. Or maybe even before that time. For so many years for one company with Frank Hoagland and all the personal friends, you would think he hesitated to leave though because he was going to be a competitor. That's right, but it's just like today I think, only it's that many years back that these fellas got a little unhappy with some of the things that Hoagland was doing and I suppose they thought, well I can do better if I didn't have to argue and dispute everything with him. Because Hoagland really controlled the ship. And I think the same thing was true with Swan Hillman. He just thought, well, gee, this is big enough and I think I can go out and start my own company and then I won't have F.G. Hoagland to contend with. Was he tough? Because Hoagland was... Yes, I think he was tough. He was never tough on me. I always got along good with him, but I know many incidents where... That's right. In the old, old days, if you worked there and you had a brother and a sister that worked there and you were a pretty good friend to Hoagland, all of a sudden he decided to terminate you Friday, your brother and sister went too. Was he always that tough? Oh yeah, the family went. Many cases of that. Many times I would have to... See, I was a personal messenger for F.G. Hoagland. I would sit at a table like this and I had a little board that was up here and it was numbered one up to ten. Number one was F.G. Hoagland, two was A.J. Stranquist. And when I would sit there and number one would ring and a bell would ring, I'd jump up in my chair and I'd go on the hall tree and put my suit coat on and I'd walk up to Mr. Hoagland and I'd say, Sir, is there something I can do for you? Yes, would you go get Mr. Gustafson? I want to talk to him at my office right away. Well, that didn't mean ten minutes from now. That meant right now. So I would go out to the factory and at that time, Mr. Gustafson was like our maintenance superintendent. And I kind of thought to myself, I'll bet anything that he's going to get fired because I knew there had been some problems. So I finally went and got Mr. Gustafson and I said, Mr. Hoagland would like to see you immediately. Well, naturally he would say to me, Do you know what it's about? And I would say, No, not really. He didn't tell me a thing. He just said he wanted to see you immediately. Well, then naturally he went down there and I went back to my desk, took my coat off. Fifteen minutes later I saw him walk right up the aisle with a little pink slip. Well, I knew he was through. He was through. So you had to be a messenger of bad news many times then? Many a times. I would come in at, oh, probably around 6 o'clock in the morning in the office, turn on this bright light, take off my suit coat and hang it up and start opening all this mail. Many a times F.G. Hoagland would come in about 7.30, tap me on the shoulder and say, Good morning, Mr. Carlson. I'm an office boy. Good morning, Mr. Carlson. I'm looking for a big check from Seeger Refrigerator. So you looked for that piece in the mail then? Yeah. So my duty was always to open the mail, anything that was addressed personally to any of the officers. I was not allowed to open. That had to be put on the side and delivered to them. But then the rest of the mail I would sort out the orders and the letters and things like that. So here I saw this check come in, and I had already opened it, said Seeger Refrigerator, so naturally I took it out, and it was a check for $80,000. I had never seen that much money in all my life. This is back in 1934. During the Depression. Yeah, $80,000. So I put that right back in the envelope and went over to Haltree and got my suit coat and put it on and walked up to Mr. Hoagland. This was about quarter to 8 in the morning. I said, Here's the check you were looking for, Mr. Hoagland. He said, Thank you, and I went back to my desk. Now the reason he was looking for that, because it was in the Depression days and money was tight. You had a payroll to meet, and in those days we paid every 2 weeks. I suppose that he had called Seeger Refrigerator and said, Do you suppose you could send me a check this week for X number? I don't know for sure, but perhaps he discounted and said, I'll give you 1% off. Sometimes they would do that. We always had a AAA rating for payments. We always discounted our bills. But there were times in the Depressions when F.G. Hoagland would say, Well, in fact, he would even send one of our vice presidents out in some of those big companies that dealt with them and says, Why don't you go out? They owe us $100,000. Why don't you go out and see if you can get a check for $30,000 and we'll give them 1%. These men were so well-known as personal relation, they said, Sure, we'll give you a check for $30,000. It was no problem. We had several of our V.P.s that could do that. Today, I don't know if that would work. I don't think so. It's a different ballgame today. More friendly, more friendly. Those same people could call that man and say, Hey, I know we're not supposed to get this till next week, but our line's going to be down tomorrow. Could you get something off tonight, Air Express or whatever? No, they didn't have Air Express then, but get it off by rail. We would do that. We would turn cartwheels for people. I think in the older days, there was more of a personal relation at the top level down to certain people. But when they conducted the correspondence then through the secretary, there was always their sir. Oh, yes, and yours very truly and things like that. Like, for instance, if he wrote a letter to Levine Faust or Oskar Lindström, there was always their sir. Oh, yes, very personal, very personal and formal. How was he now, Frank Hogan? He looks like a... Can you imagine that when I started in the mailing room, I think I was making $80 a month, and the vice president come to me and said, You'll have to wear a suit coat when you deliver the mail in the office. And I said, I'm not going to do that. The vice president did. And he was a distant relative of F.G. Hoagland. He was like a nephew or something, real nice man. And I said, Gee, I've only got one suit. And I said, I wear that to church on Sundays? And he says, I don't feel I want to wear that to work here every day. I won't have anything, and I can't afford to go out and buy another suit. And I said, I'll pay you $36. And I had another young man worked with me that would help me out and peddle the mail once in a while to relieve me in the afternoons a little bit. Well, he says, Don't say anything to F.G., but he says, Why don't you go down to C.V. Olsen's on 7th Street and each of you pick out a suit and give me the bill. Well, that was pretty nice of the vice president. So we both went down there, and we went down and bought a dark suit, double-breasted, two pair of pants and a coat for $36. We wanted two pair of pants because they got the most wear. We always hung the suit coat up on a hall tree long as we were in our little cubbyhole. And then whenever we left that place to go to any of the offices, we had to put our coat on because everybody in the office wore suit coats, no air conditioning. And you had tie, too, in the course of the day. Oh, sure, and a white shirt. And shirts were 50 cents a penny in those days. Fifty cents, you get a nice white shirt. And so he bought us each a suit, and then to not make it look funny, I wore my suit the next day, and the other fellow didn't wear his suit for two days, so they didn't think we went and got a suit because they knew we couldn't afford to buy a suit, and we thought it was awful nice, and we told F.G. Hoagland that he had helped us out, but he satisfied Hoagland's request. And we enjoyed it. We thought that was pretty nice that we had another new suit not to wear. So you were in the right style. That's right, and you weren't allowed to eat at the work. You couldn't sit and drink milk. You couldn't smoke at your desk. And no coffee in between. No, so then the girls would all come down to my little department in the back, and they'd say, even Hoagland's secretary, and the vice-president's secretary would come down and say, Anything good to eat here? I'd say, well, got a few cookies back here. And I had a big filing department with a lot of drawers in it, and then I'd say, well, go back there in the bottom drawer and help yourself to a cookie, and I'll watch for F.G. Hoagland. That way the girls were safe. They'd squat down between the files, and they'd eat a cookie and drink a little milk or something. And then they'd watch while F.G. Hoagland would get out and start to come down the aisle and say, Here comes F.G., and they'd shut the drawer and they'd be working. Never wanted him to see you not working. So he had a lot of respect with him when he showed up. Oh, he had a big office like this, but all day long he sat at a table like this outside of his office. And he would sit and turn around and look at our office, and we were about 300, 400 people in that office, and he would just sit like this and look at all the office people, and they'd become petrified. But he wasn't thinking about them. He had something else on his mind. And then he'd get up. He would get up from his desk, and he would start to walk down. My wife, who wasn't my wife then, but I met her up at Lock Company, was a secretary to the traffic manager. That was an important job. And he had a desk just in the open. Nobody had offices. Just Oakland had one private office, and he only sat in there when he fired somebody or had an attorney or a lawyer. The rest of the time, all the work was done out on the table. He would start down the office aisle, and he'd go like this, and if he saw a common pin, we used a lot of common pins to pin. We didn't staple. We used common pins to pin paper together. He would stoop right over like this, and the poor girl walking in the back would almost hit him. She'd have to stop right away so she wouldn't bump him because he wouldn't tell you he's going to do that. And he'd pick that pin up, and he'd walk along, and then he'd lay it on the next girl's desk, and then he'd go right on his business. Didn't want to waste anything. Then he would come down to where my wife worked, and her boss, who was a traffic manager, was way down two blocks down to the receiving department talking with the shipping and receiving man. Now, every desk had a chair on the side like this, see? So F.G. Hoagland would come down, you know, and he's my wife there, and the traffic manager isn't in his chair, so he just goes over and sits down like this, says good morning to my wife, and he just sits like this, and he looks up at the clock. It's 22 minutes after 10, and he sits there. Now, he knows that the traffic manager can only be doing one thing, he went to the toilet. But why isn't he on his desk working? So he'd sit there because he just figures, well, he'll be back, and then I'll talk to him, rather than to go back and phone him. You solve the problem. Right away my wife would know that this poor traffic manager isn't going to be back for a half hour. So she turns around and calls on the phone and gets a hold of Mr. Forsberg and says, you better come right back to your desk, Mr. Hoagland's sitting at your desk. Well, he didn't know my wife would do that, see? So pretty soon in comes the traffic manager. Mr. Forsberg, he would say, and then they would talk their business, and then he would go back. Now, lo and behold, what would happen if he didn't come back for half, three-quarters of an hour? Then he'd send for you. Probably. So you always went through an intermediary when you wanted to talk to somebody. Went right to the people. And then you called him into his room. Well, if it was something real important, but he'd go right to their desk and talk to them. He wanted to talk to them about some traffic problem. But when they fired somebody... But he would never look and say, well, the traffic manager isn't there, I better not go down there like we do today. He just went down there and figured, well, he's not there, but he'll be back. Because in those days, when the bell rang at 5, everybody didn't run out the door. First of all, you'd look, where's Hoagland? If he's sitting at his desk, you didn't want to be the first one to stand up and go put your coat and hat on because you thought, he's standing looking at me. So you'd sit there and you'd look around, you'd say, well, let's see, it's about 5 after, I think I better go. See, that's the way it was. Those were the old days. But everybody worked hard. You were a young guy now coming in there. You saw all this. Sure. What did you... did you respect it or did you... I respected it. You did? Sure. Because I was brought up in a family where we went to church and we respected our parents. And I always worked hard. I worked after school, I worked before school. I took care of our yard. We had a big yard, big, beautiful big lawn, big fish pool out in the back. And we didn't have no hired man. That was my job. My dad said, that's the least you can do. We're feeding you, we're clothing you, and until you get your feet on the ground, we expect you to take care of these things for me. Help me out. But like now, G. Geraldine, for instance, he'd been there for many, many years. I saw him in the same place. Do you think they had a feeling that they were watched all the time and they were not free enough to have the independence they wanted? Probably not so much with them because they were creative in their own little angles. See, we people, we were producers, we were workers. Those type of men were probably more inventive. They were coming up with new ideas. But there was problems there too. So those inventors, now they had their mind used like Hoagland in different ways. Yeah, yeah. But the regular production worker, no. Regular production worker, no. He must have a feeling, though, that he was watched all the time and it's a bad... Yeah, but he didn't get out in the plant too much. But many of his top people, he would terminate them, you know. He didn't feel bad about letting anybody go, you know. He even kicked his own nephew out of there at one time. His nephew told me, he says, I have no assurance of a steady job here. If I do something that Hoagland doesn't like, he'll just tell me I'm through. And he was never remorseful about it? No, no. He was shrewd, shrewd businessman. Liked by some people, hated by others. Was he a loud orator? No, very quiet. To me, I'm just an office boy, it was always Mr. Carlson. When I first started there, he said to me, he says, now, every morning when you come to work, he says, I would appreciate if you would take my pen and pencil set and flush out all the ink out of it and put all new ink in. I want that done every morning before I come to work. So the first thing after I got the mail opened, I would always see that about by 7.30 I had his pen set all clean and orderly and that the clock was set at the precise time. That was part of my ritual. When I come to work, I had to do those things. And then I opened all the windows along the office and let cold air in until the girls come. See, I was the only one in there. I would come in at 6 o'clock in the morning, see. And I remember in the Depression, I got a $10 check from him with a little letter thanking me for working at National Lock and signed Mr. Carlson. And he signed it F.G. Hoagland and thanked me and he said, here's a little appreciation. A personal note? Yeah, letterhead. I still have it home somewhere in the file. That's remarkable, though. I mean, there's so much on his mind, you know. But very few others got any bonuses. And $10 in those days, I thought, gee. You know, I didn't think so much of the $10 as I did that it was F.G. Hoagland who gave it to me. So you were very close to him then? I was pretty close because I drove his car. He had a little Chevrolet coupe and he would ask me to go on errands once in a while for him. He couldn't drive himself? Oh, yeah, but he was at work and he wanted me to go get something. And then I did a lot for A.J. Stranquus, who was his right man. You see, when F.G. Hoagland sat here at his table...