 I'm going to talk about the film. Today, June 27, 1986, I'm sitting with Sophie Miller in Rockford, Illinois. She was born on July 22, 1996 in Phillipsburg, Pennsylvania. If I ask you now, your father, he came from Dalsland. He came from Dalsland. No, he was born in Stockholm. Born in Stockholm. But he is from Dalsland. All his people came from Dalsland. You don't know the place? No. He never talked much. He didn't? Yes. Where did your mother come from? Dalsland. That's all I know. Was she married? She was on the farm in Dalsland. Was she married when she came to Pennsylvania? Yes, she was here four years before she was married. So she married in Pennsylvania? Yes. And she came to Phillipsburg? Yes. She came directly to Phillipsburg from Sutton Island, I guess. And your father was? I don't know much about what he was. But you were born in Phillipsburg? No. I was born in a little town called Loch Lomond. Loch Lomond? Yes. It's a small town. My dad was a railroad man. And his place of business was right down there. And they named the place Loch Lomond so the train had a place to stop. But we always were born in Phillipsburg. We always said that. All our papers are down from Phillipsburg. And birth certificates, we haven't any because the courthouse burned. Did you belong to any church in Phillipsburg? Huh? Did you belong to any church in Phillipsburg? Your parents? They lived a little ways away from Phillipsburg, about a mile and a half away. On the train, where you got the train. And there was no church in the area? No. You didn't belong to any church? The church was the Lutheran Church in Alport. Did you belong to it? Oh yes. I was baptized there. Was it Swedish? Yes. First Lutheran Church. Was the church Swedish? Yes, a little. It was Swedish. But it was so far. It was almost 10 miles to go and we never got there. And 10 cents on the bus, or the streetcar. And that was too much for five children, 50 cents a dollar. Because dad didn't make good money. Didn't you? He got 27 dollars and 50 cents a month. That was a lot. But everything was cheap in those days. It's been many years now. But you remember how you grew up? Oh yes. Yes, I remember how I went up and down the railroad. And there were trams that came. And they were standing there. And all of a sudden this one tram pulled his real dark glasses off his eyes. He says, now which way will we go? Pa said, you better go the way you come. He stood by the window listening. He says, you better come by the way you started out and you won't get lost. Oh yes, he stopped the train one time. When I was coming home from school, there was a bunch of trams that lived over in the woods over there. And they were all chasing me. And he stopped the train and boy did them train men bustle them trams in a boxcar and lock them up. And took them someplace, I don't know where they took them, but boy, they were gone from there. Yeah, but Dad was down there, you know, he was signal man. And he stopped the train and they knew that something was wrong when Louie did that. So they stopped the train right then and after them, bums in a hurry. Bridget Redd though? Huh? Bridget Redd? Did you get scared? Oh, a young girl. My land, I know a lot more now than I knew then. I didn't know that much then. But you think what they would have done to me? No. So, oh yeah, we used to go out and pick blueberries. Tramp six miles and have a 20 quart bucket and fill that and carry that home. And all our picking baskets, we had about 40 quart of berries. And my mother, after she had tramped around the woods all day, she put them up that night. And then she baked bread the day before so we'd have nice fresh bread. When we come home, not a slice of bread was left. Not a slice. That tramps had gone in and taken it all and eaten it. So then it was, oh, Sophie, run down to the store and get a loaf of bread. I was tickled pink because I liked bought bread better than I liked her, you know. It was a change. My mother made awful good bread, though. But you liked bought bread better because it was different. Well, for the time being. You didn't dare say that, though. She made good bread, though. But you didn't dare say, though, you liked the... Oh, we told her. You did? We told her we liked that other bread good. What did she say then? Nothing. Nothing. She knew that we liked the change. My mother wasn't a... You could talk to her, you know. She was a hard person in her way. She could wrap you a good one just as well as look at you, you know. She could. Oh, yes. But that was it. Who not to respect, may I say? Oh, she had to have. My dad would have corrected her. My dad was a cripple. He had his leg off to there. He worked on the section gang. A train got loose coming down the hill. I mean a car got loose. And some guy just had him look up and he hollered, Watch out, Louie. And so dad threw himself over like that. And so that was it. Ran over his leg? Huh? Ran over his leg? Yeah, and it took... Then they gave him a pint of whiskey, you know. And he held two men up, way up. They weighed 250 pounds apiece. And he held them up just like that. That strong. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, so that's the way it goes. So after that accident, he got an easier job than with the railroad? He was working for the railroad. Yeah, and then they gave him this other job. So he worked for them for years. He was a brake man then on a train? He was a signal man. A signal man. Uh-huh. So he worked for the railroad all his life then? That's right. All since he'd come from Sweden. I suppose when he was in Sweden, he worked... On the farm? Yeah, in a fabrik. Yeah. Yeah, in a fabrik? Yeah. Well, no, I'll tell you, when my dad was young, his sister worked in the hospital. And he was in the hospital. He was blind. Who? My dad. He was blind? Yeah, blind. And he couldn't, he didn't see. And, of course, he was doctoring there. And so one day he was going along, and he says to his sister, Ida, you can't see. You can't just see. Uh-huh. So you can't see, Nusan. So he's been all right since then. He never had what you would call awfully strong eyes, but he got along. Yeah. Oh, we were a healthy family. Mama arbetade utanför hemmet. Huh? Mama arbetade utanför hemmet. Well, hun arbetade hemma med fem kids, du vet. Var du en utav de yngre, eller? De er plentig yngre med fem barn, du vet. Var du yngst? Huh? Var du yngst? No, I was next to the last. The last. Yeah. Men, of course, broomin han sa, var babyen. Han ville inte vara denne baby. Inte det? No, you're the baby, he'd say. Hvor mange pojkar var ni? Huh? Hvor mange brødre har du? Well, we had two boys and two girls. Me, three girls. Three girls and two boys. And I started school when I was five. Oh. I started school when I was five years old and got along just fine. And started working when I was 12. 12. You quit school then? I didn't exactly quit, I studied at home. So, I've got a good education. So you like to write and... Oh, yeah, I love to read. Always loved to read and always got good marks in school. What kind of books did you read? The kind they had then, you know. We didn't pay for books. Did you read any Swedish books? No, no, no, no, no. When I was five years old, my folks quit talking Swedish. They did? Yeah. How come you have contained your Swedish a good though? Oh, I didn't know it for years. And then my man had a cousin that come over from Sweden. And we taught him English and I got Swedish. So there we are. And I'm not going to mix no Swedish and English. I had a sister-in-law. Oh, how was it she used to say? Oh, we got to go hop on the street car and we're going down. I said, I thought you were a Swede. Well, and then always, when she was going to say what's the use of things, what's the juice? I said, there's no juice around it, Esther. I said, you've gone to school here. I said, speak English if you're going to speak it. Otherwise, don't speak it. And that was all there was to it. So you were careful with it? Huh? You were careful with it? Oh, well, I've always been that way. I've always wanted my lessons just so, my everything. I'm still that way a little bit here and they don't like it. Now, I don't like that they don't have the beds made at this time, you know. But then... What kind of work did you get after school? Oh, housework, of course. That's all there was. Oh, yeah, there was the shirt factory and the... the shirt factory. In Eltona? Oh, we had two factories there. The laundry. No, only bad girls worked there. Bad girls? Bad. Bad girls. You mean... Well, that's what we always heard. In what way were they bad? I don't know. That's all we ever heard was only bad girls worked there. So you didn't want to work there then? There was a bad place? So my mother would never let us go and work there. And they got a few cents more an hour. I worked for a dollar and a quarter a week. A lot of money. Oh. But we got along. We got along well. I started babysitting when I was about 8 years old, I guess. There was a... Oh, poor little Edith. She was so fat. And she always wanted to come up to our house. So I had to, for a quarter a week, I had to go down and get her and bring her up. And then we got halfway down. And she said, beta me, beta me. She weighed more than I did. She weighed 85 pounds, I weighed 65 pounds. I said, beta yourself. And she didn't know what I said, you know. So we got her home anyway. How long have you been in Philipsburg? My son? How long did you stay? No, no, no. I came to Rockford when I was 14. Your parents moved? No, my sister and I came. What was her name? Youngdahl. Yeah, but the first name? Sophie Youngdahl. There was you there, but how about your sister's name? Ida. Ida. And you came here to Rockford? We came to Rockford. She was older than me. What was the reason you left for Rockford? Do you have friends here? Cousins here. Cousins. And they kept, we had been to Patton, Pennsylvania. And there was a Rockford, or Patton families that were going to move to Rockford. Well, my cousin, she kept on and on and on and on and wanting me to come to Rockford. So Ida and I, we made up our minds we'd come, and we stayed here. So I called Rockford my home. You never went back to Philipsburg? Oh, I've been back there dozens of times. For visits? But you never intended to stay back there? No, no. My sister, my oldest sister and I, we used to talk about if we ever got a loan that we'd live together, you know. Well, I got a loan first, and... Was she married? Huh? She married, and Ida married. Oh, yeah. She married here in Rockford. How much older was she than you? My oldest sister got married, but she had a punk of a husband. He was no good at all. And he said to me one time, we were sitting out in the swing, You know, I never did want your sister, I always wanted you. And I said, well, I never wanted you. Because my dad didn't like him. Was he a Swede? No. Was he? No. How did you dare date a non-Swede? Well, my folks are Swedish. I know, but why... I mean, your sister, she married a non-Swede. She married a Swede. The oldest one, he wasn't no Swede. Oh, I see. But the oldest one married a Swede. And, well, my brothers didn't marry Swedes, and my oldest sister didn't. It was just my sister and I that did. Oh. And so my dad always liked my husband, because he was Swedish. It was Viktor Möller. Uh-huh. But what kind of work did you do then when you came to Rockford? Housework. That was the only thing to do. You didn't try to go to school or anything like that? There was no use, we couldn't afford it. You know, when you think over a lifetime, you got a lot of thinking ahead of you at times. Oh, yeah, I hope to tell you. And we lived down in the side track. I'm describing this now, see? The side track went there. We lived up on kind of a little hill like, you know. And the train that took the coal and that from the mining country, see? It took the coal and that from there, that was behind there, see? Then in front of us, right in front of us, was the Pennsylvania line, the railroad line, you know, where you could go right to town. Then was this crossing that I told you about. And then this way went down to Clearfield, and you could get to New York and places like that on it, you know. And then Phillipsburg, see? And, of course, whenever we wanted to go, we just got on the train. They all knew us, the conductor knew us, you know, and knew Dad. You didn't have to pay them? No, uh-uh. And so... But that was a good deal. You could come out in the woods. Yeah, it should be that way now, huh? And so then... I have to stop and think sometimes. It's a long, long time, you know. But it's a beautiful country, you know. Oh, is it ever. And like I say, we used to go and pick berries. And one day, Team Road, you know. You know what I mean, Team Road? Team Road? What is that? I could tell you a lot of things you don't know. Well, that's what I want to know. They called it the State Road, Dad. Team Road. Team Road, because it was, no, it wasn't fixed or anything, you know. They called it Team Road. And so it was just mud. When it rained and in the wintertime, you know, it was more icy and snowy, you know. But, well... But when you went out, you not pick berries in the woods? We went out and picked berries, yeah. One day, you know when dog days are? Dog days? Uh-huh. Well, anyway, we were coming in. Oh, it was such a hot, hot day, you know. And shoes and stockings often slung over our shoulders, you know. Like that flat on a rattlesnake attempt. Pretty soon, and dog days, they're sleeping, you know. Their eyes are shut. Their head went up anyway, just like that. And I just got out of there in time. And that crazy second sister of mine, she chased it down the woods. She could have gotten into a whole den of them down there. She didn't care. She didn't care at all. You mean you were not afraid of rattlesnakes? Oh, sure I was. No, but your sister? She chased it. I don't know. And then they had bears down there, too. Huh? They had bears. I don't know anything about it because I didn't dare look at it, you know. I just jumped back. Did you see any bears? No. No? We never did. We had one old fellow there. His name was Grimley. And he come down one day. We stopped to get a drink of water. And he said, Don't go up in the woods up there, girls, he says. There's snakes up there. Or there's a big black bar. Big black bar. Beer. Yeah, bar. He called it a bar. Bar. Yeah. And he slept down in the Acme slope. Mine. Yeah. Uh-huh. But you never saw him? Huh? You never saw him? Who, the bear? Yeah. No, I never seen it. So the most dangerous things then back in the woods there, they were the rattlesnakes and the tramps. Well, tramps weren't there. No? They didn't go there because they knew the snakes and bears was up there. This was in the little woods around, you know, wherever they'd see them. Like coming here, you see, you know, on Milford Road, all that patch of woods and that. They'd go in there somewhere or other and maybe cook supper or something like that. Gosh. Yeah, so that's that. Well, listen, I got to get through here because I got them coming here at 9 o'clock. You came here to Rockford and then you got married? Yeah. Here in Rockford. Yeah, I got married in Rockford. Yeah, it was Victor Muller. Huh? It was Victor Muller. Victor Muller. Victor Muller, yeah. Yeah. But his brothers, his two brothers had come here from Sweden and they changed their name from Muller to Miller. To Miller. So I've been Miller ever since. What kind of work was he doing? Well, he was a boss down at Sun Strands. And then he went in for tool and die making. So more or less, he nearly always was a boss, my husband was. And now my son, like I say, he's the... You had one son? I had one son that died. My first son died. And then I got a son and I've got a daughter. Uh-huh. And when you got married, you didn't continue to work then? You stopped working then? You stayed at home? Oh, I worked all my life. I've sold this and I've sold that and I've done everything. You've been a seamstress then? Huh? You've been a seamstress? I've been everything. Anything to make some money, crocheting and crocheting and crocheting and... You know? So you bought your own house down in Rockford when you married? We didn't buy our house for a long time afterwards. We was in the store business afterwards. I had a little store on 11th and Broadway. And then we were out in the north end on Latham and Fulton. And then we were up on Rome Avenue and was up there. And then from there he went to Rockford Clutch. And he was at Rockford Clutch for, oh I don't know, about 28, 30 years. He died 29 years ago. 29 years ago? Yeah. So... You had an affair on 7th Street. Yeah. What did you sell there? What kind of affair was it? No... You had a store? Not on 7th Street, no. No? No. Our first store was a little store on 11th near Broadway. And then we went from there and out to Latham and Fulton. What kind of store was it? Grocery. Oh, grocery? Grocery. And meat. And then from up in Latham and Fulton we went down to Highland, down to Royal Avenue and Rome Court. And they built up a, it was kind of a little shack that they built up into the big building that it is now. That is now. But we were in there when it was just a small wooden building. Now this is many years ago, you know. Years ago. Were you alone in the store or did your husband help you? My husband helped up in, I was still out on Latham and Fulton and he was on Rural Street for a while. So you had two stores then? Well, for a little while until we got rid of the one out in the North End. And the fellow that was going to buy it is a fellow that we bought it from. And so we had to, we got rid of it. So the one on the North End now, didn't that work out pretty good or what happened to it? Why did you sell it? Well, depression came along and we lost everything. There was bad times? Bad times. Bad times. People just didn't have money enough to buy it. They didn't have money, they come and charge it, oh yes, we'll pay now. So you had them on the books then? Yeah, that's what they did in the end of days, you know. They never paid cash right away? Some did and some didn't. And it was up in Highland. And we lost more money from Highland people than we did up in the North End among the poor people up there. We only had one customer that didn't pay now and we could have gotten him if we would have gone to the government about it because he was an old soldier. What kind of people lived at Highland? Oh, what kind of people? Swedes? Swedes and all kinds of people. You mean they didn't pay up? They didn't pay up, no. We had, well there were a different, a mixture of them, you know. And one of them come in and always paying cash, you know. Well, as a matter of fact, I sat, I babysat for this one family. They owed me over $400. But the kids didn't know that. When she found out that I was there sitting for her grandchildren, you know, she never came to see them after that. No, no, she didn't want to see me, you know. And I worked in a grocery store for a while. And she'd always come in, because they closed at 6 o'clock then, you know, at night. And she'd come in about 6 o'clock and always, after the boss had taken all, well most of the money out of the cash register, you know, she'd come in to cash a $20 bill. So I said to her one night, I said, Mrs. Anderson, well do you know me, well I certainly should, I said, you bought enough groceries for me, I said. And she had forgotten. She never paid a cent. You see, if I would have wanted to have been smart, I could have taken money out of her money that she'd come in with, and then she'd have had to pay her bill. But you didn't do that. Because, no, oh I'm honest. Start to. Why should I take her money? She was working for it too. Because you owed her money. She owed me money, yes. And her son and his wife were nice. What happened to their family later on then? Oh, they're all spread around. The one daughter, she belongs to our church. They are artists and, and, but he lives up on Paris Avenue, his wife inherited a big home up there, from cousins of a friend of mine. So they did alright then later on? They didn't know about it. But they never paid you back? No, the children didn't know about it. No, I sat with Lois, and I sat with Joy, and I sat with Bud and Laurel, and I sat with one of the other ones. I sat with four of the kids. And I did an awful lot of babysitting, an awful lot. But didn't you feel a little bit awkward? Here they owe you $400 and you had to take a licking for it. No, you get so used to that, that people are going to pay you and they never pay you the... You have a different outlook when you're in business, you know, than what you... So it was impossible to enforce it, to get the money? You left that store and then moved on to another one? Well, we, of course, when we got through with the Highlands, or with the, out in the North End, we were out near the driving park, you know, and we made good money out there. And then the chain stores happened to come in. Well, then people, they thought they could get things cheaper there, so they didn't do so much buying from the regular stores, you know. And so Sundays was a good day then, you know, because people... Sundays? Yes, because the chain stores weren't open on Sundays, you know, in them days. Oh, yeah, we were open all the time. And, well, then when we moved, we bought a house on Rural Street. That one between Rome Avenue and Paris Avenue on that side, a little brick bungalow. And, well, I couldn't work in the store very much then because I was pregnant. And so I just helped out when I could. And then, like I say, depression came along in full swing, you know. And then I had two youngsters then. They were 14 months difference in their age. There was too much hardship then to open many stores. So I couldn't stay in the store very much, although my husband's cousin from Sweden, yes, they could, you know, he lived with us. He lived with us for 15 and a half years. So he helped out too then? So he would watch the kids a little bit for me while I helped in the store so Vic could get out a little bit, you know. It's tiresome to sit in a store all the time, you know. How were you able not to have the two stores there and pay the bills? Well, no, he stayed in one and I stayed out in that until I had a man helping me out in the north end. And then he got kind of smart, you know, and sued us for more money. And he agreed to work for what we would give him, you know. And then he thought, oh, he can get more than that. So the court said, no, he says, you agreed that? And he says, that's what you have to stay by. So the court stuck up for us. He says, when you agree to a thing, he said, you certainly don't think that a person can up and up and up all the time when you want it, he said. He said, so whoever put that in your head, you better tell them they got a foolish idea. So that was all there was to that. So I wasn't there very long after that. But you kept the two stores during the Depression? Well, no, no, no, no, not very long, just till we got rid of the one in the north end. So the north end was no good? Well, we wandered over on the east side. We never liked the north end. We always liked on the east side of the river. Why did you go up to the north end, though? Because it seemed like a good buy. Did you know the neighborhood before you moved in there? No, we moved in two. It was three rooms in the back where we stayed, and then it was a pretty big store. What street was it on? Latham, the corner of Latham and Fulton. And across the, kitty corner across the street from us, we had a girl that worked for us. Oh, she was a swell girl. She was a Lithuanian girl, but she was honest and good. And then up, when we were up on Roman Rural Street, she came all the way every morning from way out on, she lived on Latham Street, and she came out and worked for us. Every day she came in the morning. And one day, she always used to tell me, now be careful when you cut meat so you don't get your fingers down in there. She got her finger taken off there in it. So you had a whole line of meat and groceries? Oh, yeah. Yeah, we had a lot of meat. Oh, yeah, I've cut up a lot of meat in my days. I've done everything. I've sold news magazines, and I've sold corsets, and I've sold... I've sold everything. Yes. So what did they buy in all the sweets when they came into the store? Did they come twice a week, or...? Oh, we had one woman we opened up at six in the morning. Six in the morning? Yeah, I opened up. My husband slept, and I opened up. And we had one woman that'd come there three times a day. I said to her one time, I said, Rose, why can't you buy enough for one day's supply instead of running back and forth? Because when I bought groceries, I bought for all week. Maybe once in a while I might need bread or something like that, but always different teaching, you know. The Americans are different than the Swedes. Sure. My mother, she always had plenty to eat, you know. And no matter who came, she could always find something to eat. My mother was a great one to... Well, no matter how hot it was out, she'd light a fire in the cook's store and hurry up quick and stir up a cake and give them coffee and cake. Yeah, my mother was awful good that way. Yeah. Then your husband, though, he was a good singer. Yeah, oh, yeah. He was a tenor. Did he play the Svea singing or Lion? He sang with Svea Sønder. He sang with Liron for many, many years and Svithjed, and he is supposed to have started the harmony chorus. He was with on that, but he never got credit for that. So... So he was active in singing then? Oh, he was a good, healthy guy, yeah. So... That's the way it goes, you know. So they had performances then in Rockford, and did they go other places too to sing? Yeah, oh, yeah. They did? Yeah, they had their conventions every summer, you know. Did he belong to any other organizations, like Vasa or... He just belonged to the singers. He didn't care much for... He didn't care for lodges, no. And he was foreman down the Sunstrands. Well, then he worked there after you sold the stores? Huh? No, no, no, no, before. Before? And I said to him, I said, Vic, I said, anybody can be a foreman, why don't you go in the tool room and learn a trade? Well, you told him that? Yeah. So he did. And... So after he learned his trade, is when we started in business. I think we had been married about... Oh... Let's see... Maybe eight... No, no, I guess my boy went to Turner School. I had a boy that died when he was ten. And we lived and took care of... His mother died, and we had his dad living with us. And so then the old man got it into his head that he wanted to get married again. And his sister-in-law was crazy about him when he was in Sweden. And none of the kids liked her. She was, as they say, false. False? Yeah, you know. So did she marry him? I don't think she ever got married. But you know, when my mother-in-law lay sick... One day you was wet, but I'm not. And was dying. She was only 58 years old. And a woman, she came and stretched over her like this. And she said, Oh, Augusta, sa hon, te tänka du som er så ung ska dö. Å Adolf som har varit kren så länge, å han måste leva. That was Augusta's brother, Adolf. And, oh, after a while he died. But, I don't know. Yeah, it was pretty mean. It was pretty mean to say things like that. Oh, she was a mean one. No. She was a mean one. Yeah. So people were not always that nice. What? People were not always that nice. No, no, no. And the old man did get married. He married an old maid. And she had been housekeeper for a fellow by the name of Anderson that lived down on 6th Street. That had three daughters. And I guess she raised the daughters up from when they... The mother died when they were young. She raised them up. And, you know, she always liked me. She did. Uh-huh. And she liked my husband. And she would leave us in the house, you know. But otherwise the rest of them, they could stay out as far as she was concerned, my two sister-in-laws. So, oh, after a matter of years, I don't know how many years they were married. But then my two sister-in-laws went to the... they went to the funeral. They wanted me to go with, and I said, I'm no hypocrite. I said, when I was welcome in her home, I said. But I said I didn't go because Vic didn't like the idea. And, but they went. Oh, yes. Yeah. There are all kinds of people. Oh, you're telling me? I've lived with them. You know, I came from a small, well, mining. Yeah, in Pennsylvania. Uh-huh. So people were different back there. But you were younger when you lived there, so you don't really... Oh, I was a kid, you know. I was 14 when I came to Rockford. But were people different in the time? Yes. But they were nice people around there, very nice. So where you came from now, in Pennsylvania, they were mostly the same kind of people. We had... There were not any wealthy ones. No, we had one Swedish family. We had French. We had Italian. We had Slavish. We had Hungarians. We had... Polish. Polish. German, French. And they all went to school, you know. We went to primary and grammar room school. And you were not hacked upon because you were a Swede or anything like that? You were all one... Oh, they liked to tease us sometimes, you know. But... You did the presentation. Like this one fellow from Hawk Run. He'd say to my sister, Tikka-tonka, Tikka-tonka, you know, he thought he was talking Swedish. And she said to him, Ah, go on, your tongue's loose at both ends. He never said any more to her. Never. But we went to the... We were baptized Swedish Lutherans, you know. But we went to the Episcopal Church in Hawk Run. And that was a good, well, a little over a mile. And boy... Were we scared on Christmas. Because them Polish people, they dressed up so crazy like, you know, like they do here at Halloween. And they do that for Christmas. And they'd scare us, you know. So that was one Sunday we didn't go to church. Christmas Day? Yeah, because we were scared. And my dad and mother, they had church in the afternoon. You see, the one that had our church, he had four parishes all together. Yeah, so... So then when you came here to Rockford, then you had mostly Swedes? Well, yeah, I guess. Although we lived with an English and German family. We, I tell you, we went to the Rockford girls' home. And we stayed there. And there was four girls from Freeport that came here. And we were good friends with them. And... Oh, it's been so long since I thought about these things. And one of them, her brother, her brother was a priest, and her sister was a nun. So she had to go to the priest at St. James Church to ask his permission if she could live in that home. They were strict in them days, you know. And... So she couldn't decide it herself? Wasn't it kind of odd, though, that she couldn't decide it on herself? Oh, yeah, yes. She had to wait till the priest told her to go. I don't know. It's been so long ago since I've kind of forgotten. And we had one dear old lady there, Mrs. Brown. She was a regular mother to us. She was, she was just like a mother. And she was Catholic. And she said, Oh, Clara, it's all right to go. She says, You tell them I'm here. So I guess that's what got her in. I don't know. I don't know. They don't tell you the right part of it, you know. But then... She was funny. She'd wash her hair at night and always wanted me to comb it because she liked the way I combed her hair. And she'd sit up all night. Wouldn't go to bed. No. For fear she'd miss her hair. Yeah. So I said to her one time, I said, Get up five minutes early and get me up five minutes early and then we'll fix it. No, I won't do that, she says. That's taking away from you. Because I had a long day. We worked from 7 till 5.30. So you were an early riser. Huh? You were an early riser in the morning. Oh, yeah. Always had been. My mother got us up at 5 o'clock every morning. My dad, God bless him, he had a black cat. And in the wintertime when it was really cold, you know, he had named the cat Nig because it was all black, not a white spot on it. But Nig would jump up on him and he wouldn't hurt him. He'd come creeping nicely and his head was over here and his feet was way around here. And Dad always said he had a good fur piece, a good neck piece. Yeah. My dad had a tough time of it. He had this leg up to here. But he was a good guy. He was a good, honest Christian guy. Paid—I went to work when I was 12 years old. A dollar and a quarter a week. A lot of money. Paid 10 cents a week for a pair of shoes when I wanted a pair of shoes. A dollar and a quarter for a pair of shoes. I've never been hard on clothes, never on shoes or that. Where did you buy your clothes now here in Rockford? Did you go to Chicago or you bought them in stores here? My mother made quite a few of our dresses. Oh, when you were home. But how about here in Rockford? Did you make your own dresses here? No. You bought them? No, I bought them. No. Yeah. Clothes were cheap in them days. So you didn't pay them to make them? You could buy a nice dress for 75 cents here then. So you didn't pay to make them yourself? No. The material. And then afterwards it went up. Because the war came, you know, and everything went up. Such a terrible price. Yeah. Oh, I've seen a little of the better and a little of the worst. Yeah. The ladies now, or the women, they were not dressed in slacks like they are today? Yeah. A whole lot. Slacks? My granddaughter came in with a... I know. But I mean, in your time in Rockford, in the early years, in the 30s and... My granddaughter came in one day and she had a dress on like I had when I was a kid. Exactly the same way it was made and everything else. So they're going back to old times. They're going back to old times then. But you never had slacks though, like they have today? No. No, no, no, no. You ever thought... No, I'd never wear them, I said. And I was in Minneapolis and my niece up there, she... We went to the store to Penny's. And I bought me two jackets and two pair of slacks suits, you know, two slacks suits. And so I wore one of them. And when I came off the plane in... Oh, on the east side, that plane there, you know, my sister and girlfriend met me there at the bus. And they looked. And they looked again and they said, Sophie, she's got slacks on. And so I did. I liked them, too. They're handy things. I like them better than I do a dress. You can sit down anywhere and, well, if you're modest, it helps a lot. But why wouldn't they accept it 50 years ago? Because in the Bible it says that no woman should be dressed like a man. Whatever it says. And they went by that. Now they go to church or anywhere with them. Huh? Now they go to church or anywhere with them. I hope to tell you they've got dress slacks and... Sure. So there was a reason. I go to church. I went to church with them on, too. Yeah. Yeah, well, that's the way it goes. Do you believe everything you read in the Bible or heard from the Bible? Or what the pastor says? Or do you think for yourself? Well, I'm telling you it's a matter for thought. In some places there's contradictions. Yes. And, well, you're supposed to believe what the Bible says. But... Why do they confuse people? It's not nice. Well, that's it. Why? They can't help it. I guess they have to different ones write differently. Yeah. My minister was here yesterday afternoon, my senior minister. And he's probably going to... Well, he's going to a dermatologist. He had two blue spots, one here and one here, and then two blue spots on his chest, he said. And so he was going to go and see what they could do with them. And so that's the way it'll go. I hope that he gets them fixed up. And I said to him that I went to a dermatologist, too, and, What are you going for? I said, for that awful itch I had, and I showed him them marks that hadn't left. They've been there now for a long time. But that itch has come back a little bit, you know, and I don't like that. No. Were you interested in politics? Am I interested in politics? Yeah, and back then when they had the Swedish mayors, Hallström and Blum and... I liked Hallström. I thought he was a pretty nice fellow. And Blum. They were down in Florida one year when we were there, so I met them personally. Vic knew them because, you see, they all came down to Leiren. He joined Leiren afterwards. Swedish owners got a little bit high hat, you know, they wanted. And my old man, he was more just a good person. Yeah. And so that's it. But when he died, well, he's been gone 29 years now. When he died, I had his boss came one day and said, Oh, Sophie, you don't know how we miss Vic. And I said, I can imagine. No matter how bad he felt when he left home, he could always tell a joke and make the guys laugh when he got down there. He was a good guy.