 My dad was named, see my grandfather was named Johannes and my grandmother was Johanna, which would be John. And my father was named John. He was born in Sweden and he was from over here and he was a year old. He was named John, but there were 23 John Nelsons at Oakland, Nebraska, that's a Swedish community right north of Omaha about 70 miles. They homesteaded right out of there. And so he had to change his name because he didn't have a name other than John. And so he took initials, L-E. Now later, my sisters, as they were born, there were four of them ahead of me, they decided they wanted him to have a name on it, so they named him Lars Edgar. But he was christened John, but he went by Lars Edgar all his life from the time I was born, you know, Lars Edgar Nelson. But his real name was John and my oldest son's name is John. So this carries on the tradition of, I suppose they were named Johnson their last name in Sweden originally. But when they came over here, they decided to break that tradition and start naming them the same John. Johanna was John and Johannes was John. And they're buried at Oakland, Nebraska as my father is and my mother. But anyway, that's the story of the names. So he was born in Sweden? He was born in Sweden. Do you know the place where he came from? Well, it's just outside of Stockholm and we've tried to find the thing, but I don't know where to go to. I went to Stockholm and I couldn't figure out how to do it. Now I read something the other day, there's a Swedish American Society that I could send the information to and they'd try to track it down. But nobody got interested in it and my dad was 53 when he got married, I mean when I was born. He was 47 when he got married and so he was, when I was 12 he was 65. So we cover a long span of years, you know, the two of us. And he didn't have the records because it was his father's record, you know. And his dad, somehow they've lost the records of, they never were naturalized, neither was my father. But he didn't realize that he wasn't a U.S. citizen until he came to Omaha to vote. And some said, were you born in Sweden? He said, yeah. Well, were you naturalized? He said, no. He was 87 years old and they wouldn't let him vote and it broke his heart, you know. But that's the way it was, you know, and the old immigrants come in, they couldn't talk English and it was pretty tough. My dad got so he could talk English good. So your grandparents also came from Sweden that we settled here in? Yes. So Herman, where is that located? Well, it's 30 miles north, 35 miles north of Omaha. North Omaha. And then Oakland is just another 20 miles north of that. So they all were in the same area. And your mother, her name was, your mother. My mother's name, she was German, Lillian Maurer, M-A-U-R-E-R, but she wasn't Swedish. But I never had anything to do with the other side of the family. In fact, I didn't know any of them, just my mom. And she was gone when I was just a little boy, five years old. And so my whole life was raised in the Swedish community, you know, all my relatives. And they're all over Oakland up there. There must be a couple hundred of them. My father had four sisters and they all had big families. And then we get together up at Oakland and have 250 people there, you know. It's a big family. So the German background then, she was born in this country? No, she was born here, yes. There are a lot of Germans up north of here. At West Point and Euling. Right north of Fremont there's a town called Euling, U-E-H-L-I-N-G. And that was a German settlement. And West Point, Nebraska is mostly all German. And my mother's father was very wealthy. By those standards in those days, he owned two square sections of land, which was big. Very rich land, right north of Euling. And he raised, there were 12 children, and my mom was one of the youngest of the group. And they came from the upper Rhine and upper area. Now my oldest sister knows the background of them, and she's dead. But her children have the records of that family. I was way down the line, and I never did get acquainted with only two. I saw my grandfather when I was five years old. He lived in 99 Marr. And I saw one of my sister's brothers. And that's the only people I've ever seen. All my life has been in the Swedish community. In fact, my dad had me talk in Swedish when I was a kid, a little kid, you know. How many children were you in your five? Four sisters and me. You were the only boy then. I was the last child. And how did they meet now, your parents? Well, my father was farming. And, of course, Mr. Maurer was farming, her father. And they were all not quite adjacent. They were a couple of miles apart. And they used to trade help, you know, help each other, the farmers. They still do. And that's how he got to know the family. And that's the way they got acquainted. They lived in the same township, you know. Did they join the Swedish American Church? Swedish Lutheran. Swedish Lutheran in? Oakland, Nebraska, yeah. So they belonged then. Also your grandparents belonged to that one. Yes. All the family was Lutheran except me. I was born in Hermann. And it wasn't a Lutheran church. It was a Baptist and a Methodist and the Baptist church. Then I came here, and my wife was a Presbyterian. And I didn't like the Presbyterian, so we went to the Congregational, which is the Church of Christ. And we're there now, and my family is all in there. We're all in the First Congregational Church here. So your wife, she is also of what background? Danish. Danish background. And her maiden name was Ruth Hansen. Ruth Hilda Hansen. H-A-N-S-E-N. And she's pure Dane. Grandparents on both sides were born in Denmark. When was she born? Same age as you then? No, she's January 10, 1913. In Nebraska? Right here in Council Bluffs. How did you meet? Well... What happened after you went through high school and in... Omaha. I finished in Omaha. So it was closer than living up there? No, but see, my father went back to West Point, and I came to Omaha. In fact, I ran away when I was 14. You didn't have anything to do with farming? Well, no, no. My dad was wonderful, but he only knew one thing, and that was work. 4.30 in the morning, 10.30 at night. And I was just a kid, and when he sold his business in Herman, I decided that was it. Was that farming, or... He sold his business in Herman. He had a business there. He had several businesses. And he went back to West Point and had a business there. Was it a grocery store, or... No, it was a... It was a combination of... He had tobacco. He had kind of an entertainment center, really. He had beer. And it was very successful. All the farmers would come in there. I remember that. But I never went to West Point until a couple years later, three years later. But he was in business with my mother's brother. That's how I met him. I went up there to see him. And it was a popular deal in those days to have a card room for these old fellas, because they could talk native language, you know. And so they had a big card room, and they had food, and somebody else did the food. And they had beer. It was just kind of a central place. Dad didn't need to have a business. He just did it as something to pass time away. And my mother was gone, so he was alone. And they had a very good business there. He stayed there for a number of years. I'd say 10 or 12 years. He was in his late 70s when he left there. So he had to have been up there. I was 14. I was born in 1912, so it was 1926. And he was still there up until 1940. He died when he was 89. And your sisters, now, did they get married? Each of them had four children, three boys and a girl, and they all were in Omaha. In fact, my youngest sister that's alive, there was one that was younger, but she got killed by a car hitter, she's still in Omaha. And the other two just passed away. One just passed away this year, the second oldest one. And then you ran away to whom? To Omaha. But you had to stay with somebody. No, I got a room. I delivered papers, and I made about $6 a week doing that. And then I worked in a place there, 24th and Lake, it's right in the heart of the Negro District, and I made $5 a week there. And that was $11 a week, and I lived on that. And I walked to school, Omaha Tech, Tech High. And then I got a job in the summertime working in construction. You had no family? I had family, but I didn't want to live with them. You were on your own. Bullheaded. How about your father? Did he object to you? Never, never let go. He knew where I was all the time. I found out later I didn't. He was watching me all the time. Because you were the only son. Sure, and he understood my problem. I never had a... In a little town, you do a lot of things. I trapped, and I'd skin rabbits and sell them, and I'd grind horseradish and sell it. But see, just Dad and me, and I could do anything I wanted to, but I still had to work, get up every morning and work. And I did that. As soon as I cleaned the business up, I'd take off and follow my trapline. And I'd sell this stuff, so I had extra money. How old were you when you started with the traplines? I started... It's a very interesting story. There's a couple of big ranches up there, and in those days they were flooded because all this land here was underwater, you know. And they put drainage decks all up and down this valley, drainage, so they could have wheat for the First World War, you know. But where they had those levees, they let the water in there in the spring, and then the silt would keep building the soil up. But they were great hunting places. So these ranchers would invite people up there to hunt, and I would guide them in those levees because I trapped there from the time I was 9 years old until I was 14. So you had the gun also down the hall? I didn't really have a gun until I was 12. I mean, I was... I think my dad was afraid to let me have a gun when I was little, though I could shoot, I'd shoot a rifle. You were interested in guns, then? Huh? You were interested to... Oh, I have 50 guns. I love guns. I've got beautiful... I've given my boys Belgian guns, brownings, you know, Belgian brownings. They all have a set of guns. They're worth a lot of money. I've given them to them. I'd like to have them. Have them, if they never use them, they're still beautiful to have, you know. Are they interested in your... Yes, my hobbies. I've got pictures of the kids hunting with me. I've taken them to Canada hunting. How about your father? Was he... Never. He just... once in a while. Well, he was too busy. He just had too much to do. It was hard work. He loved to do it, but he just... he took me fishing twice. And I fished all over this part of the world, international rod and reel out of Florida. So then I got down here and I got through high school. And then I went to work on a telephone crew, putting in high lines. And when the Depression came, which was the 1929s, that's when I graduated from high school, and I'd worked the summer before for the telephone company, putting in poles, you know. And then the next year I went to work for them. They wanted me back. And then the stock market collapsed in September and they had to cut all our construction off, so I was laid off. But they brought me into Omaha and gave me a job running the elevators in the main building on weekends. And I also got $10 a month as a kind of a deal because I'd been an employee. So I went down to the University of Omaha, which was then not connected with the Nebraska University. And I got a job firing boilers in one of the buildings. And then at noon I would hop tables in the cafeteria in the basement of the World Middle World. And there was a commerce school right there at 13th and Farnham, so I went there during the day. I'd get up at 4.30, just like I always did, fire those boilers. Then I'd go to class, and at 11.30 I'd go just over and work there till 1 o'clock, and I got one meal. And then I'd go back to class, and then that night I took care of the law office, which had their night school upstairs. And I'd close that building and fire the boilers down and go home. And I had that every day, see. Got one meal a day. Well, finally. Well, that was normal. I mean, it was tough times, you know. And I got a great admiration. I went to day school, got a commerce deal. You know, I knew how to type and take shorthand. But I was so impressed with those guys going to law school at night that in 1931 I came over here and was working for the gas companies. But in 1931, I came over here and went to work. I went to work in 1931, and I had a desire to go back there and go to night law school. And my sisters encouraged me, and the tuition was $100 a year, and then you buy your own books, which cost another $40, and I only made $720 a year. And so I had to find some extra work, which I did on weekends. But I started, and right in the middle of my second year, the gas company transferred me to the big gas company in Omaha, the Northern Natural Gas, which was just sold and sent to Houston. And I went down to Skellytown, Texas, and set up offices and accounts all the way up to Albert Lea, Minnesota. But I couldn't go back to law school. So the next year I started over. That was in 1935. And in 1935, 36, and 37, and I passed the bar examinations in 37, and in 38 I got my degree. In fact, I think it's... It seems to me like it's over here, my law degree. And she took them over to have them redone with a gold edge on them. That's why they weren't here. Otherwise, they'd have been sitting right there. But they're going to reframe them, you know. So they'd look better in the office. And along in 1939, I had become pretty active here in town in the Chamber of Commerce. I formed the Junior Chamber of Commerce here, Red Oak, Shenandoah, the whole area. And I became an officer in the State Association. And somebody approached me, and I got my law degree in 38. And in 39, Traveller Insurance Company came and interviewed me for a job. A lot of insurance companies wanted me to sell insurance, but I didn't want that. I wanted to be greedy in administration, and I had my law degree. Well, they came up with the job to buy up what are called general agents in this whole area. And it's a contractual thing, and they had to buy those contracts up because they had excess commission for developing the territory for the Traveller Insurance Company. So I did. I went to work for them to do that, and I had a year to get it done, and I got to know all these agents. And it looked to me like they were making a lot of money for a darn little work. And they weren't too smart, and yet they were running insurance agencies. And so when I got done with the job in five months instead of a year, and I saved the company about $7 million that they allocated, so they wanted me to go into management. And I said, well, all right. But I really had in my mind that I'd have my own agency because the best offer I had to go into law practice here was $75 a month, $75, and I had two kids, and I couldn't live on that. So I went with Traveller for five years, and I made my mind up that I was going to leave at the end of the five years. They offered me a lot of jobs in Florida and Bridgeport, Connecticut, and finally in Hartford, the home office, but I decided I wanted my own business. So I started this on January 1, 1945, and this is it. Started from scratch. How were you able not to see what they had done before you? Because you were brand new, you know, from law school. Yeah. What kind of vision did you have, right, about you saw something was wrong here? Well, I'll tell you what I saw wrong. I worked with these men, as I told you, buying up these contracts. Then I worked with those agents for five years all over Nebraska, southwest Iowa, you know, and some in South Dakota, and I analyzed what they were doing in the community, what their depth of knowledge was, how they managed their time, why they were satisfied to quit when they got up to $4,000 or $5,000 a year and not reach any further. And when they'd go home at night, I'd go out in their town and sell insurance and give it to them the next morning to sharpen my selling skill, you know. So you went door to door also then during that time, too? Huh? You went also door to door then? Well, sure. See, when I got done with the management end of it, they brought me out to Omaha and made me assistant manager, and I had to work with agents, appoint agents, train agents, and I thought, well, gee whiz, I work harder, I'm a seven-day-a-week guy, I work every day and I work every night, and I can have my own business. And so I started in a little tiny office up here, and my wife was my secretary and bookkeeper, and they're going to hang a picture of the two of us up here on the wall. She was in the insurance business before I got into it. So this is how you met them? Well, she, no, I met her, she went to church one night with another couple, and he worked at the gas company. And it was Sunday night, they went to young people's meeting, and she lived next door to the girl, and the boy's father was an architect, engineer here, Victor Jensen, and he was a Danish guy. And that couple invited my wife to go to church. Well, Victor came in, we were redoing all the streets here, so we were open seven days a week, and I worked, I had nobody, never had gone with a girl or never had a date. And they come in with her, introduced me to her, and it was Sunday night about 8, 39 o'clock. And another fellow and I, who still lives here, were taking care of the switchboard, incoming calls, because there was a lot of open streets here, you know, and holes and everything. So they introduced me to her, and I really never thought anything about it. I'd never gone out with a girl, I really didn't know how. My sister was just, everybody was no good, you know. And anyway, this was in November. So Christmas came, and these guys belonged to the Mason order, the Masonic order, Nimale, and they were going to have a dance. And I didn't know how to dance, but they asked me if I'd call the girl up and get a date with her. So we went to the dance, and I had to sit there, I couldn't dance, you know. And so one thing led to another, and finally I told her, I said, I can't go with you, I don't have any money, and I'm going to school, and she worked right across the street in an insurance office. And I bought that agency later. And anyway, she stayed with it, and I got two years done in my law school, and in 1935 we were married. We've been married 52 years, October 11th, just a couple days ago. So she bought your honesty, in other words, you went without bluffing anything, you could have said, you know, you had a good job or anything like that, you have to get a date, but you just were honest enough to say that you didn't have a job. Well, I didn't have any money. And no dancing skills. That's right. But you were not afraid to lose her then, I mean, to some other guy. Well, I don't know that she ever went with anybody. I don't think she ever went with anyone else. She was very young, as I was, you know, just out of school. And I guess maybe she'd gone to parties with a couple of people, but she had never been serious about anybody. And what church did she belong to then? She belonged to Presbyterian Church, and then I belonged to the Baptist. And our Baptist church is right behind our office here. And so one day I said, well, why don't we find a church we both can get along with? And the Baptists were pretty strict, you know. And so I went to her church for a little bit, and I didn't like the minister. Well, the other minister... He was different then, of course. Well, he was more indifferent. Later on he wound up, he was a homosexual. He even had them back then. Yeah. But this minister that was at the church over here, at the first congregation, was one of the ministers, he was one of the men that founded the Rotary Code of Ethics. And I know you've heard of the Rotary Club. Yes. Well, he founded the Rotary Code of Ethics. He also had been the warden, the minister at Sing Sing. So he came here with a great deal of experience. And he's a little fella, and he wrote two marvelous books. And they're really wonderful. One of them is about this area, but he preached different. There's nothing like the Baptist where the devil was going to burn your tail. They scared you to death. But he never did that. And it appealed to me. He's factual, you know. And we became great, close, personal friends. In fact, he became the chaplain of the Elks Club. I was the exalted ruler, as my son has been. And I... For 23 years, until he died, we were extremely close. He's a fine man, and I just thought the world of him. He was starving to death. He was getting $2,200 a year as a minister. And I said, I want to take over the membership drive, and I want to take over the budget drive. I enlisted every member of the church and how much they'd given for five years. And our budget was $12,000. Just think of that in our church. Dirt floor in the basement. When I got done, we'd raise $55,000. That put the church... It was back then. That was a lot of money. And people called up. They fainted. They did everything. But he deserved it. He deserved more money. And I did it because I thought people, the richest people in town, weren't sending a penny. They'd marry their kids, bury their people, never give a dime to the church or him. And that ended that shit. They got in there and went to work. They started paying. And now it's one of the nicest churches in town. We own all this property right over here on First Avenue. The ministers paid about $40,000 a year and furnished a car and a house. And that's what Jake should have had all the time. But, you know... But he stayed then for a year? He stayed till he died. He stayed till he died. And I kept increasing that budget every year. And the people, the minute they'd named me, they'd send their money in. They wouldn't even wait for somebody to call them. They were scared to death I'd publish that list again. So you had the council bluffs under your thumbnail? Yes. So you became like your father to you then? Yes, sir. You're a hard driver. Yes, sir. If we go back a little bit now, and if you think back, your father probably didn't pay you anything when you worked from sundown to sundown. Never, no. Had it made any difference if he had paid you a little bit, $5 a week, for instance? No, because... You were still independent? No, you know, you never thought like that when you were a kid, when I was a kid. Your dad fed you, took care of you, housed you, and he was all I had, you know. And there was no money coming to you? No, I used to raise pigs and he'd sell them, you know, and I'd trap and he'd sell the furs. And it wasn't that he wasn't honest with me. It was just the way things were. Whatever you made went in the family. Every child at that time didn't expect any money or money in the world? No, never. But had it made any difference, you think, if you had been paid at that time? No. You still had the wandering lust and independence? Well, I had the wanderlust, I did. And the thing I really wanted, I guess... I guess what I really wanted was to be independent, and I still am. I was that way as a kid because, you see, without a mother, I was doing things like business when I was just a kid. I was trapping and skinning them and drying them and selling the furs. And I was raising pigs. I'd get the runt pig, you know, up on the ranch because I helped him up there. And I guided those men and they'd give me a little pig. And, of course, I'd go buy a sack of shorts, you know, for a nickel, and I'd mix them with skim milk. I worked milk cows in a dairy right outside the edge of town, at Herman, and they always would run it through the separator, and I'd get the skim milk and mix it with the shorts. And every year I raised one pig or two, and everybody got a kick out of it because I only had wooden gates about the size of this room. And I babied those pigs, you know. They'd come over and scratch them, and then Dad would sell the pigs. But I never thought I was entitled to any money. If I needed anything, he got it for me. You know, he was a wonderful father. I've never met a man I admire more than my dad. He was too old. Continue next slide. Next slide. He was a kind man. He never punished us. He was highly respected. He had real solid principles, honesty, truthfulness, fairness, and he exercised them all his life. He never did anything to hurt anybody, and yet he was a hard-working businessman, hard. Did he see any of your labors now paying off? He was 87 when you died. Yes, he did see me. What did he say then, or think then? He was very, very proud. He was very proud of me. Because you had excelled. Sure. It would have been impossible to attend. Well, sure. He didn't have an education. And, see, his brothers and sisters got to go to school, but he didn't. He had to take care of the homestead. It was a sod house. You know, just real pioneers. And my grandfather worked in Omaha in the Union Pacific shops, and he would ride horseback 70 miles and come up to see them. But Dad took care of his mother, and that's why he didn't marry until so late, you know. And, oh, he was a fantastic man. Did he stay with you down there in Constantinople? Yes. He did? He did, finally. Well, he'd stay with his sister, and then he finally, when he died, he was with me. I mean, during that time, the year before he died. And he stayed with us, and... So he saw your work and what you had out there? Yes, yes. Nothing like this. No, no, no. I just had a little dinky office a third this size. But you still had a sizable income. I mean, the supersedes... Well, no, I really didn't. I was making about $400 a month when he died. He said it took some years then before you could afford to own it. Oh, hell, I didn't really get going until I was almost 60. I'm 75 now. I was almost 60 years old before I... Were you eager to make a lot of money or... No, never, never down on me to make a lot of money. I never thought about the money. That's just come. You know, just worked like hell, and the money came because you did a good service. One of the nicest things about Scandinavian people is their work ethic. You know that. And my dad taught me to work, and I'm grateful. And I taught my boy to work. He's a hard worker. So how many children do you have? Two boys. Two boys. And you made a comfortable living then after the Second World War, and you had your wife and you had your office. Well, we had a home. You had to spend all that. Yeah. We had this small office. It was just a small office, but it took about... Well, the first year I did income tax work along with the other, you know, and all that sort of thing to supplement my income. It's hard to start in the insurance business. So your law degree, you had no thoughts in your mind to be a trial lawyer or going to... To be a what? To be a trial lawyer? Well, I tried to practice law. You did? Yeah, but I couldn't support my family. I did it on... Were there too many lawyers then? Now there's ten times as many, but there were too many here for the... For the size of the area? Yeah, way too many lawyers. And the best I was offered was $75 a month. That's all I could get, and I couldn't live on that, you know. And then you had to go into another law firm, I suppose, to be a partner. Yes. Well, you wouldn't be a partner. You'd just be a clerk. You know how it is in Sweden, don't you? So you had no thoughts of going that way. You would like to be in the... When I went through this deal with the insurance people in three states, and I saw how comfortable they were living, and they weren't working. They weren't thinking. They weren't planning. They weren't marketing, you know, and they were lazy. And I thought, if I really worked, I could have a business just like this real quick. But you had to be in control of it yourself to... Yes....the destiny. Yeah, I tried to go to work for somebody, and they said, Oh, you can't make a living in this thing. Nobody, you know. We can't hire you. So, hell, I just started on my own. I had $74 in the bank when I quit. Started my business. $74. Wife and two kids and a mortgage. Did you buy your own house immediately when you married? Yeah, we had had some little insurance policies, and we borrowed on those until we got $1,000, and then we paid that down on our house, and the house cost $6,000. And then we had payments to make, you know. Did your wife quit working then when she started? She worked for, until the child, our child was born. She worked for two years and a half. And then she had to... Then the family started, you know. John was born in 1940, and we were married in 1935, so she worked. And we lost a child in 1938, a little girl. So she worked about two years and a half, and then she never worked after that except to help me, you know. And then you came into this Redland group. What does it derive from? Redland. What does it stand for? Me? Well, this is your own... My name was Red Nelson. So you were the Red here then? Well, the employees named it Red Land. That's why they named it that. It comes from that. It's a compliment to me. You have that on your business card also, Red Nelson. Were you known as a Swede at that time? That's all I'm known as. A great Swede storyteller, and I have a lot of fun with it. We have a Swede's Day. We're going to have it in Omaha, October 20. They just called me the other day. The Olsen brothers in Omaha, do you know? Have you heard of them? I know of them, yes. Well, Myron Olsen called me, and the Swede's Day is the 29th of October, and it's Omaha Businessmen's Association, and we put on a program. We have potato sausage and all stuff, you know. Great day. How about the culture? What did you bring into your family, to your wife? Is it all Danish cooking or... for holidays, Christmas? I would say that it's predominantly Danish cooking. It comes out of her naturally. We have a lot of fun teasing her about Swedish meatballs. She likes fish, you know, but Danes like fish, you know, herring, stuff like that. So they go together. How about your children? Do they eat blue fish, for instance? Oh, yeah. They do? With the cream sauce? See, we have a place in Minnesota, you know, up at Park Rapids, Minnesota, and it's a very lovely summer home, and the kids love the fish, and they love to go up there, and the grandchildren. Here's my grandchildren. See that deal up in the corner? This is your oldest son, then, or... Oh, did you see the grandchildren? The two... How did they marry, now, then? Did they marry? No, no, they're too young. I mean, your sons, though. Who did they marry? Vikings? One girl was from Minnesota. She's three or four nationalities. Some of it is Scandinavian, German, Irish, and the other girl is Irish. She's, I'd say, mostly Irish. But they fit in well, and... Oh, yeah. They're a great family. And they work, then, for you when you're... No, no. They don't? No, no. The girls? No, no. No, but I mean your sons. Well, my one son is right next door. He's the... Next in line. President, and I'm the chairman of the board. The other boy had the same... I gave him each a third of the business, and he decided he wanted to live a life of enjoyment, so he retired at 40, about 35. He sold his stock, and he traded the stock for a preferred stock, and he's got a nice income, so he just lives the life of Riley. But he now has laid around for five or six years, and he decides he wants to get into a business. Is he married? Oh, yeah. The two boys. Two boys there. The two boys on this end are his. So he travels, then? No, he's not sure. He's now going to start a business down in Nebraska City with another fellow, a local fellow. But that's the first thing he's tried to do since he left here, which was five years ago. But I worried about it, but, you know, I decided that you can't change people. You didn't dictate anything over it? He's got too goddamn much money. That's the struggle. I made too much money and gave him too much money, and the business grew and the stock went up in value, and he sold it for a lot of money, and he's got an income of about $100,000 a year, and he's happy. You saw the potentials of the insurance business early. Yeah, well, I made some good investments, too. How about your older son now that's the president? Did you push him like your father pushed you, or were you careful to tell him what to do? No, no, he's got a mind of his own just like me. You expect that. He went to a school in Minnesota, Carleton College. It was right south of Minneapolis. He's Northfield, Minnesota, and he went in the Navy. He's got four years in the Navy when he got out of college. He was a lieutenant in the Navy and went to Harvard Business School, and he's always had the ambition to be the head of the business, and he's done beautiful. He just brought the dog track in here. He's the boy that brought John Nelson. I read about that Saturday. It was a big article. John Nelson. John Nelson? That's your son. That's my son. He's right in the next door. He's been the president of everything in town. So he worked with this Bryant from Alabama. Yes. We were just there last Wednesday. We flew down to Alabama. He testified in a trial down there. John did. I flew down with him. That's why I wasn't here. Yes, I remember you had that. That's Mr. Bryant. He's here all. He'll probably be in here tomorrow or the next day. He is the son of the football coach. Yes. The winningest coach in the United States. Yes. So how did he get into that though? Well, John found him. He had a number of the promoters. Because he's a young guy, this Bryant. Yes, but the promoters were all connected with the mafia, and he was trying to get the tote board, you know, where it takes track of who wins and how much money you collect, and he flew into Montana in our plane. So you have your own corporate plane. Yes. And he flew into Montana, and the man up there told him there's only one man in the United States that he thought was honest, and that was Mr. Bryant. So he called him right there. He said, I'd like to talk to you. So Bryant met him here, and in one week they worked it out. Now John's responsible for it. And this is success? Oh, marvelous. You have taken over Exxon Airbnb now. Yes, CXAirbnb gave all their money to Omaha and very little of it here. So what we wanted was something that we could build a town. And as soon as that's paid off, we'll have $3 million to $4 million a year to develop this town, and that's what John had in mind. And they were kicking a little bit about in the news that so much money went to Alabama. Yes, but he's the guy that puts his name on the line for $19 million, so he's got to pay that. If that thing goes down the tube, he's down the tube. But that's all flying. They're in good management. How can they keep the underworld away from it? Well, the minute anybody gets close to him, he notifies the Federal Bureau of Investigation, and they stop it right there. He's honest, and all he's got to do is just call the FBI. And that stops the boys. They don't come around. They nail them right to the wall. The Iowa Bureau of Investigation, they have men there all the time, so nobody can get next to him. If they try to get next to him, they slap him in jail. And this is in a good location and close range. In fact, he's got states all over the country. Kansas wants him to have two down there. Idaho just called him. They want him to put one in Idaho. Washington wants him to put one in Washington, in Spokane. He's got such a fine reputation that they're all after him to open up dog tracks. Two in Kansas. They want two down there. And they had all this smear deal they had in the paper, so they cut him off, and now they're back asking him, please come down. We found out all that's a bunch of lies, and it was. Well, I suppose people are jealous. Oh, sure they are. Sure they are. One of the bad deals is his former manager, who was a good friend of John's, he got fired because he wasn't efficient. And he just cut him to ribbons in the newspaper. And they went to Kansas, and now they found out it was all lies. Now they want him bad. And of course, they said a lot about us writing the insurance. Well, hell, it's a drop in the bucket for us for insurance. We write almost $100 million in premium. And we had to bid against the guy in Alabama who writes the tracks down there. So we had to bid against him. He was trying to get the business, and we underbid him and got the business. And we got it fair and square. They make it sound like it was a kickback or something. But John does this free. They're not a penny. You don't get a dime out of it. He's done it all for the town. Hell, I bet they owe us $100,000 just for the use of our airplane for two years, flying all over. But another four or five years, the council blocks three different times. Oh, you better believe it. What do you have now in looking forward to the vision of council blocks? Oh, all of this down here, that all comes from the dog track, that green stuff out there. All the plantings, the people that mow it, all around the town. It was just all in weeds. And he's made them come in, and he hires the kids, or the Iowa West Racing Association, which is people from every walk of life here in town. There are 15 of them, people from different businesses and organizations, churches. They run the Iowa West. John's just the chairman of it. And they decide they want to beautify the town. So they've gone along and killed the weeds and the sidewalks and mowed these pieces of property, keep it looking decent. And give them a little time when they get a million or two million or three million a year to work with, they'll have this town bouncing, you know, five years. And employ people also. Sure they do. Sure. They hire these kids to do this out of the orphanage up here, Christian Home. They hire those kids to do this work and pay them so the kids have something to do, not sitting on their ass, you know. So he is coming right out of your veins, so to speak. You have the same interest of helping people. Sure, I got into that. I've been president of the National Association of Independent Insurance Agents, which is so-called Big I. 175,000 agents. I've been national president. There's an award I got for it. National awards. 1965. Is he also interested in church life? He even... The congregation church? He preaches about once a year. He's a guest lay preacher at the church. How about the political aspirations? No, no, no. We've stayed out of politics. Now, he's a power in politics. The governor comes over here. The governor comes over here and cut the ribbon because they want John to get in politics. But he's tried to stay out of it. Neutral, then. He doesn't commit himself to be a Republican. No, no. He's a Republican, as I am. But that's his personal choice of what party he belongs to. But he tries to stay out of politics as such. He still tries to influence voting for the right person. We contribute money to it and your name to it, but he doesn't get involved in being elected to anything. Your father, when he tried to cast his first vote, was he going to be a Republican then or a Democrat? My father was a Republican all his life, until the very end of his life. And he felt... I think what upset him was he felt that the Depression was caused by Wall Street in New York. And Hoover. No, no, no, no. He thought Hoover was a fine man. It wasn't Hoover. But Roosevelt came in with Social Security for older people in 1937. And Dad thought that was something that should have been done to protect older people. And he admired him for that. And of course I didn't like him because he packed the Supreme Court the same way they're trying to do right now, see. And I didn't like him for that. And I didn't like his wife because she was a socialist, a libertarian, you know. So did he change then his political viewpoints, your father? Well, he never really became a Democrat, but he had an admiration. See, then he found out he couldn't vote. And that upset him terribly. So he didn't become a citizen then? He never could, not at that age, 80-some years old, you know. Well, it was too late. I'm going to have to leave you pretty quick. I'll give you a list of things that you might want here. Here's your pen. If I can find it. There's a sheet. Things like that. So insurance is the big deal. There's three levels. One deals with the public downstairs. Then we have an insurance company here that operates in 17 states. And up on the next floor we have American Agra Insurance, which deals through other agents. We get the business from them, 2,700 of them. And they pour that business in here. And we write crop insurance, hail and multi-parole, anything that happens. In addition, we write package insurance on farms, like you do on a home, put it all together. We write livestock, even livestock that's shipped to all over the world. Like right now we cover stuff that's going into Siam and breeding stock. So you cover more than the Midwest then? We cover anything in the world that we can cover. We even cover stuff at Lloyd's. Our men just got back today. We've been in Paris, London, Munich, Geneva, Copenhagen, setting reinsurance. We have to reinsure the risk. And we work out our reinsurance for next year, and they're over there now. Actually, we're working out the reinsurance for 89. We've got 88 placed last year. So we work a year ahead of time, you understand. And those men back today, they've been over there for about 2 1⁄2 weeks. So that's a busy business area. It's a big operation. You bet it's a big business. So that was the end of the interview with H. Redd Nelson, Council Cross, Iowa. End of interview. That was the day, 14th of October, 1987.