 Now this is cassette two, side one, in its continuation with Mr. C.C. Johnson, Oma, Nebraska. Cassette two, side one. During 1930s, the right into the Depression, you were working between 1927 and 1933 with the best electric company in East Iowa. But at that time, you were also actively involved with politics. A little. But you were a chairman. Chairman of the Story County Committee for Roosevelt. How did you come in contact with that organization? Well, it was organized. There were lots of things that happened during that Depression period. See, the Depression really started in 19, oh, about 18 or 19 in the Middle West, the Corn Belt. And they, there was some spontaneous effort made to organize committees. And then when the question of electing a president came up, they thought there ought to be county committees. And so they named a special one to elect Roosevelt because there were so many Republicans there. They had identified not with the Republican County Committee, but a committee of their own. So then you got involved with the local committee. Yeah, I was named chairman of it. So what kind of work had you done previously? Oh, I'd done, basically, I was a farm boy working with my uncle on the farm close to where we spoke about the church, the Covenant Church in Stratford. And I did everything you can think of on farming. And my father died when I was 15, so I was very much alone, and I was very distressed about his death. But I worked just about anything that you could think of in trying to make a living. But they must have thought very highly of you to elect you as a chairman. Well, they did in Ames because it may well be that they didn't have anybody else that would take it. You were living in Ames at that time? Yes, yeah. And you were assistant to Dr. C.H. Workman? Workman, yeah. And then 1933, 1942, you were assistant to the chief of Corn and Hog Section of Agriculture Adjustment Administration, USDA. Yeah, well. Was that in Washington, D.C.? That was in Washington, D.C. So after 1933 being a chairman of that region there, Roosevelt won the election with the landslide also up there. What did people say then? There must have been some diehard Republicans left in the county. It was so bad they didn't want to talk about it. They disappeared? Yeah. Like prairie dogs. Yeah, yeah. So what did you say now about Roosevelt when you were out campaigning? Well, I was young and broke and hungry, and I got to be a very good friend of Henry A. Wallace, who was named the secretary of agriculture. And Henry was a very able man, one of the most able men that I know of in all that I have done in terms of Washington. But he was not a politician. He was an economist. He was not a farm boy. He came from another... Well, he was basically a journalist. They had Wallace's Farmer, and Wallace's Farmer was a magazine that his father had something to do with it, and his grandfather was a minister down in south of Des Moines somewhere. Do you know that he had a daughter that was married to Ambassador Per Wittmann in Montreal, Canada? Yeah. You know that, John? Yeah. She is still living in Des Moines. Oh, she is. She is? A very fine person. So from this chairmanship of the Democratic Party group there, you got elevated and into... Well, I wanted to go to Washington. I wanted to do more something, or more than just talk about it. I wanted to get in it. But you came into top positions there, though. Well, not top, but pretty close. How did that happen? It didn't happen overnight. Well, I was ambitious. Yeah, but sometimes you had the schooling, of course, to go with it, but you were not a lawyer at that time, though. Nope. I did all my law studies down in Washington. And then you were actively involved with the Democrats. Oh, yeah. So you met with different regions. Yeah, yeah. I knew Jim Farley very well. Jim was the chairman of the Democratic National Committee, a very able man. He was only there a couple of years. He was also the head of the Post Office Department. So you were in Washington then when Franklin D. Roosevelt started his... Not when he started....his 99 days, or 100 days, as they called them. No, I was not there then. You weren't there then. No. I was paying quite a lot of attention to it. And then I went down, and I was requested to come down there and work with Dr. A.G. Black. Dr. A.G. Black was a very fine man who was an economist, too, and he was the head of the Agricultural Economics Department at Ames, Iowa. So, and during that time then, between March 9th through June 16th, so many things happened. It was 99 days there, all hectic, approaching different issues. Whatever Roosevelt wanted done, they did. They did. How was that possible, though? I mean, were people scared or did they believe everything he said? We just had this Black Monday here. Well, that's nothing to it to what it was. People didn't know how to live or how they were going to live. It was dreadful. I say there was an earlier depression that had its effect in Iowa and in the Corn Belt states, and that started in 1918 or 1919, 1919, I guess. And that, of course, then Hoover became the president. Hoover was born in Iowa but was not well regarded as a person to know how to get out of a depression. So he didn't have the enthusiasm like Roosevelt had? Oh, he didn't even, he was an engineer, basically. He didn't have any of the background that Roosevelt had. Roosevelt was a great leader. He was full of charisma. And he was able to select his delegate power also, like Burr, Hopkins, Morley, and Thornwell. And then Frances Perkins, he was the only woman. How did that come about, though? Frances Perkins? Yes. The first time in history. Yeah, she was a... Labor secretary. Labor secretary, and she had taken a lot of part in the election. And so, obviously, he wanted Frances Perkins to come over to head up one of the departments, and he figured the secretary of labor would be a good one for her. It was the most important then. Well, it was very important. And she stayed on then for the whole time. Some of them were replaced, but most of them stayed on, though. Well, there was, there was like Rex Tugwell, who was there. He was the undersecretary of agriculture, and then subsequently had other important posts. And then all this CWA, CCC, WPA, and all that cost a lot of money, and the taxes didn't replenish the funds. Were people opposed to it? Money went a lot further then, and I think, too, there was a lot less greed and selfishness. And they were willing to do things that, well, caused people to have lots of enthusiasm for what Roosevelt was trying to do. And the money was used wisely then? Oh, I think, I think it, I had a little to do with chasing down some of the people that misused the money of getting what they call the corn and hog checks. And there were very few of them. There was, actually, I think, those that we got next to, probably was under a dozen. But we did get next to them. So you had to go out to the farm country and explain to the farmers, and they asked questions? I did some, I did some. And you had to tell them what was happening and what was coming? Yep, yep, I sure did. I felt pretty, pretty big for it. I was just a farm boy that was trying to get ahead. And that's when I started studying law. But they believed you were the farmers because you came from a background and you knew what you were talking about. That's right. It was not the city boy coming in and trying to explain the farming to people. No, my people, almost all of them, sort of went under financially, not my uncle. But it was awful hard. I don't think I ever got a paycheck from my uncle. But he saw to it through my aunt. This was an uncle by marriage. My aunt somehow or another, I guess, saw that I had shoes on my feet or a few wearing apparel essentials. And then I still went to high school there. And I would stay with my mother during the week. And then I would walk after school was out on Friday night, walk to the farm. That was three and a half miles away. That puts you in Swedben. And that's where I got to know more about agriculture than lots of them that were in agricultural college. Well, you made the move now from Swedben and Stratford to Washington, D.C. You came into a lot of city slickers there. How did you mix with them? Did they respect your opinion? Were you afraid to speak up and tell them what you thought? Oh, I spoke out what I thought Henry Wallace wanted. Henry Wallace and also he was speaking for the president, President Roosevelt. So you had to follow what he said? Yeah. Well, I wasn't bright enough to have much to say against anything. You were listening in on it? Yeah, and I was for it rather than against it. But there was a tremendous public opinion against, especially, the new deal, the WPA and the National Labor Relations Act. They said they favored the union too much. Well, some people said that, but I didn't notice much of it. It was abolished, though. What? It was abolished, though, the WPA and the National Labor Relations Act. Yeah, but it went on. For a few years. Yeah. That was mostly the union. Yeah. What happened there, though? The unemployment figure went up in 1937-38. Why was that? Unemployment went up? Yeah. Well, there was sort of a, they speak of the depression having started in 1929, but, and that there's a lot of publicity indicating that the recession was over. It really wasn't. So there was another sort of down drift in 1938. And so there was a lot of looking over to see what ought to be helped and that which ought to be abolished. So the government kind of lay low, then? Well, if the government can lay low, I suppose that's what you would call it. Well, I don't know if this is the right terminology, but it looked like that if you look at the figures. Something happened there. Yeah. Because the people were against this National Labor Relations Act, of course. Well, I think they were, a lot of people were against unions. Unions. It was a bad word. Yeah, unions took the opportunity sometimes to be pretty rough. And they wanted to grow and they wanted anybody that worked to be a member of their union. So there were lots of things that went on. I don't, I didn't get too much in union activity, but I certainly watched it. And the government officials, of course, they had to, if I use the term, lay back a little bit and take a look at it. Yeah. Because they couldn't favor it too much because then they... Well, there were some very, very fine people that were in charge. Like the Wagner Labor Relations Act was passed and Wagner was a senator from New York. But I would say labor was for anything that helped the farmers. And I think also that labor saw that it's better to work together than to separate. What did the farmers' group say, because they'd always been independent, sort of. Were they for the union's demand and pressure? They overlooked it. Because they figured if they get more wages, they can buy the food. Sure, sure, sure. So there would be a ripple effect. Yeah. And then you had the amendment, the 21st Amendment in 1933, the prohibition. Yeah. How could they take time to do things like that? Was that really the... You mean the... Prohibition that was amended in 1933. Yeah. Well, there was a lot of... they weren't able to really do a job on administering the law against prohibition. Who was pressing on, though, to end it? Who was? Yeah. It seemed like almost the whole country was against the... Not the church, just the church group. Well, they were not very vocal. They have had their say for so many years. Yeah, yeah, yeah. And what do you think about it? Was it a bad idea to have this prohibition in the... Well, I didn't... I never had a drink of liquor at that time myself, so it didn't matter to me. I was uninformed. But it seems that it was a law that is found to break it. In other words, they probably broke it many, many times. Well, a lot of people, the only uplift that they got, if they could get a little corn whiskey somewhere. And a lot of them found out where they could get it. People are ingenious. Yeah, well, and there was some bootlegging, and there was a lot of bootlegging over not far from Carroll, Iowa. I forget what the town was over there, but they had stills making liquor off the corn that they had produced. So... They raised the price on bootlegging corn. Well, the corn was so cheap that it wasn't a matter of how much you could raise it. It was how you could grin and bear it. And they actually burned some of it. Oh, yeah, sure, sure, sure. It was eight cents a bushel then, corn. And that was in 1933, and then the corn loan came out, which I had quite a little to do with, the corn loan program. And that was a loan on corn stored on the farm at 45 cents a bushel. So then they had those corn readers going off to measure the storage and the bins. And I had a lot to do with that. And they probably saved a lot of farms and farmers. Oh, many, many farms were saved. Gave them hope to continue on. Then in 1937, Roosevelt was going on, and he had his fire chest, of course, every week or every other week or half, was it? No, but it was pretty often. You see, there were no press conferences in the current administration, really. There were, I think, three this year. And Roosevelt was constantly informing the public as to what he was doing. And were they interested in the public? Why, sure they were. Listened when he was on the radio. Yeah, there was radio, but there was no television. But there was no... And the newspapers carried... The newspapers that now are conservative were for Roosevelt, you know. So he had the press with him. He had the press with him, and he had lots of churches with him, especially the Catholic Church was with him. So he was a popular... Yeah. I would say that among the Lutherans, there was less feeling towards being with him than there was with some of the other denominations. And in 1940, the American people broke sort of tradition to elect him for a third time. Yep. First time in history. And there was no question about it that he was going... Were you still active then, rallying votes and everything? You had to... Well, I wasn't there because I finished my law work, and in, I think, 1940, then I moved... When conditions kept getting bad for foreclosing on farms and like that, and when World War II started out, they had to have space for various activities connected with the war back in Washington. And I became an assistant to the governor of the Farm Credit Administration. And the Federal Crop Insurance Program also. Well, I was there before the Federal Crop Insurance. I was the assistant manager and secretary of the corporation. And what did that entail, that you had to travel around and... Yeah, I did a lot of traveling around. Oh, not a whole lot, I guess, but for me it was quite a lot. Did you have as an objective then to listen to what people say and carry it with you back to Washington? Well, some of it I did. I usually reported in to a fellow by the name of Dr. Bressman, who was also a Swede, and he was next to Henry Wallace. Oh, I see. And he had his office over there, so whenever I went out of town or came back, he had a PhD, so he was a very well-educated man. And Henry Wallace tried a lot of his schemes out on him before he put it before the public. I see. But when you came back, I suppose they analyzed your findings and your hearings about different things. How else could they get the people's thoughts? Well, they had... They didn't have the polls like they have today. No, but they had...the farmers elected their committeemen, you know. And they had the committeemen, the agricultural conservation people, they had for every county and for every township they had a committee. So there was a lot of interplay, and there were state committees too, so the information funneled up. And there was Roosevelt straight through the third term in 1944, again for the fourth term. What did people say, though? I mean, this was...I suppose the war made it impossible to shift gear to international politics. Oh, I don't think the war had much to it. You don't think so? No, there wasn't, like, the fellow that just died, Governor Loudon, they didn't offer very many sound candidates. Oh, London, you mean, Alpha London? Alpha London, yeah. Down in Topeka? In Topeka, yeah. Why was he in the news so much now the last few weeks? I mean, he lost... Well, he was president, campaigning for president, and I think he was a fine gentleman, but he didn't have the wherewithal to... He lost with a landslide, and still he was... Yeah, yep, yep. It sounds like he was a hero of his time. Well, I don't think he was a hero. His daughter is... Katzenbaum. Yeah, Katzenbaum in the Senate. So, and there was no question of whether he was going to be the fourth term. That's right. If he had been, I always felt, he might have gone on forever. I mean, he was so... Well, he was failing. His health. Yeah, his health was... But if he had been a healthy person, I mean, all his ideas seem to be workable, and he was implementing them in the right time. Yeah, yeah. And saved a lot of people. Well, he was a great man and still is regarded highly. Did you meet him personally at any time? Well, I saw him quite often in a group, but to sit down and visit with him, no. How about his wife now, Eleanor? Eleanor? She was... Yeah, she was active too among women. Very active. Yeah, but... Was she more aggressive type of person? Oh, she was very aggressive, but Franklin and Eleanor didn't get along too well together. If you read some of the books, Franklin and Eleanor... But you can believe everything the writer of the... Well, but it was pretty true, I think. I think Franklin, you know, had paralysis before he even run for president. 1922, 23. Yeah, and he did a good job in getting his thoughts across. He was just a great man. It seems to me that his upper body got all the strength he lost in his neck. Yeah. Well, I don't know if that was it, but when you have paralysis, it affects the nervous system, and one of the places where it can be most difficult to understand is in the legs. Also the back. I don't think he ever had any problems with his back, really, but he had lots of trouble with walking around. Of course, most of the things that his associates tried to do was to obscure the fact that he was pretty much a cripple. But they didn't come forward in the press, though. No, no. I mean, the big majority of the people. No, they were kind, and of course, if it had been television then, why, they'd probably seen it. But at that time, his voice carried a long way. Yeah, yeah. It was a good message. Yeah. So you also were with plans for production of industrial alcohol needed for synthetic rubber. Yeah. It was gasohol. Yeah. Ethanol. Yeah, ethanol, but it's the same thing almost. Yeah, it is. Was that the first time it was instigated? Pretty much in the U.S. For mass production. They made ethanol in other lands, too, and Russia was one of the ones where it was made quite often. What did they use for... They made rubber tires out of it. Rubber tires. Of course, they didn't have much to tire. They used steel wheels on their tractors. The hard rubber. Yeah, yeah. Resilience. Yes. Was the corn coming into the picture at that time to be used for alcohol? Oh, yeah, some of it. But the price was all the reach then because you had cheap oil at that time. Well, cheap oil and also the country had been dry for such a long period. When it became available, why then, of course, they would open a big market for drinking alcohol. So what was your position? You were assistant there to the boss for it. No, to... Assist the federal government or plans. Assistant, but I wasn't an assistant on developing the alcohol. What were you doing then? Well, I was in so many things that I, like at the Federal Reserve... No, well, the Federal Reserve, I knew a little about that because Spike Evans was made one of the governors of Federal Reserve and he was previously over in agriculture. When you're in an active organization like that, you meet a lot of people and you learn a lot of things that you can do. And if you want to do them, the thing to do is get busy and try and do them. You stick the neck in there and get going. If you stick too far, they might cut your neck off. But you learned after a while because you were there for several years. Yeah, yeah. You were married then at that time. Yes. So your wife was with you in Washington, D.C. And it was your wife's health that made you move west again. Yeah, she had multiple sclerosis. And actually she'd had it even before I knew her when she was a girl. They couldn't find out what was wrong with her. But it didn't develop too bad until she got older. Well, it affected her a lot at certain times. So if you have stayed now in Washington, after reading your list of accomplishments, you had a tremendous chance of going to the top. They asked me if I wanted to be a politician. Henry Wallace asked me one day. You were right in the door there. Yeah, yeah. Why didn't you take it off? My family was such I couldn't do it. Your wife didn't want you to take it off? Well, she wasn't very well. And we didn't have money, and it takes money to campaign. And a lot of things indicated that it wasn't for me. But you had a good, solid farming background here. You carried Iowa at least. You would get the money needed for it. Well, I think I could have. Were they thankful, now, the people to you, what you did? Because you were part of it. Not too much of them. The Little Pig Program made a lot of enemies, and I had quite a lot to do with that. What was that? You better explain that one. The Little Pig Program? Yeah. We had to get the price of hogs up, and it was finally decided by these committees out in the fire. The interview with C. Johnson continues on next site. Next site. Cassette 2, sign 2. So they was called the Little Pig. Well, we called it the Little Pig Program, but we also removed old sows. And I think we actually removed about 6 million little pigs. What did you do with them? Well, most of the little ones went to the rendering plant. They were killed and went to the rendering plant. The mamas for the old sows were made into Wiltshire sides, and that's about what goes on in side pork and bacon and so forth. That's a half of a hog, and they used that in many ways in the packing business. Saw bellies and... And sausage and... Were they reimbursed fairly, the farmers, for this? Sure they were. They were? Sure. But still they were against it? Well, that was the place they got their money. People can be against lots of things, but if they're paid to do it, then there's a ray of hope that by doing it, they're going to get more money. Well, that helps them. Did you have a rough time to explain to your farmers then? Well, I wasn't out a lot, but there were a lot of farmers that couldn't understand it. One of them was this dear uncle of mine who couldn't understand why we were killing little pigs. So there was something that went against his grain? Oh, he didn't like that at all. The farmers, they have always been independent people. And they don't want to take orders from higher up. I like farmers. Yes, but I mean, when you come from Washington, and you have to sit and list there for several weeks, and you come back to the roots again, did they see you as a tool of Washington, D.C.? Or did they see you as a... Oh, in the corn loan work, they certainly saw me as a tool. But everybody liked the corn loan program. So there wasn't many. Oh, I say everybody. There were some of them that objected to the way it was done. So you met with the farmers then at the schoolhouses? Well, not a lot, but some. Did they come then and take the arm around your neck and say, you are doing a good job there, Cecil? No, no. They were never that friendly? Well, I supposedly thought I was young, too young to be doing what I was in some cases. I'm pretty sure they were. The first time I went out to an audience was soon after I got to Washington. And I went over in Annandale, Virginia to explain the program to them. And of course, they weren't as bad shape as the Middle Western farmer. But they were very anxious to have the program explained. And they did. They come in and took part in it with a great deal of enthusiasm. I see. Money has a lot to do with it. Economics. How do you think now, now they say $27 billion is going into the farm program. Yeah. But you don't see anything after that $27 billion. Like in the New Deal, the roads were built and everything. Yeah, the trouble recently is that the generation of farmers come along and took over the older farms. And some of them felt they couldn't make a living out of it, except by having an increase in production. So they bought a lot of things. And they bought more land, too. That's where the problem has been connected today. Today's farmer has been a bad economic analyzer. Yeah. Because years ago, there was not too much overhead. No. You had a couple of mules or horses and a spark arrow, and then it would break. Yeah. But you were not interested in running for public office. No, no. At one time, I thought I might be a good judge. But they were not elected. That helped spur me into getting my law degrees and so forth. So then I, with my wife's condition and the way it was, and family, yeah. Because you certainly met a lot of people there. You had good use of it later on. Oh, yeah, sure. You could call them up. Sure. You didn't have to do too much lobbying. How about being a lobbyist now in Washington? How about me being a lobbyist? Yeah. Well, why should I be a lobbyist? I was enjoying life actually more direct to the farm program than the lobbyists were. Yeah, well, I mean, you were actually a lobbyist for the farmer's group. Well, I guess you could consider it that way, but I was not a lobbyist. What do they actually do, the professional lobbyists now? You don't hear too much about them, but they are very important. Oh, my gosh. They're just a whole bunch of them. This is all they do? Trying to twist the arms of the center. Well, different groups have one, two, or three lobbyists that work for them, just like employees, like the Farm Bureau and the Farmers Union and the Grange. Even the used car salesmen. Yeah, yeah, yeah. The more money they have, the more they can twist their arm. Yeah. So how was life in Washington during that time, during the 30s? Well, I was so busy, I went to law school at 7 o'clock in the morning. I was in law school and studied law every day of the week except Sunday, including Saturday. And I would be going to work at about 10 minutes of 9. I walked across the monument grounds to work. I went to law school to the Agriculture Department, and I had an office over there. Things worked out pretty good. So you rented an apartment then for your family? Yeah, well. You had the children with you also? Well, yeah. The two oldest ones were, and then the two younger ones were born in Washington. Did they go to school, then, the two older ones? Did they start a school in Washington? No, that was after we went back to Iowa. So you didn't miss Washington life then too much? Well, I missed it, but, you know, they say if you get Washington fever, it never gets out of your veins. It's like malaria. Yeah, there's some truth to it. You get the shiver. Some truth to it. You don't like to sever yourself. But I never felt that I had Washington fever. You had to be in the circles all the time. You can't postpone anything. You've got to be there. It's a hectic circle. Vicious life. And you never know what's going to come next. But it looks to me, though, that you had a tremendous foothold there on different departments and everything. But you were still more or less in the politics here in Nebraska also, though. Well, some, but not... Like in 1965, for instance, you were appointed the special attorney general, for instance. Yeah, on one lawsuit. On one lawsuit, yeah. You didn't have any aspirations to be a district attorney? No, no, no, no, no. What does that involve, though? Is that too controversial an issue? What's that? You're the attorney general for the state of Nebraska. Well, the Republicans generally have the attorney general here. No Democrats in Nebraska. Well, there are quite a few Democrats, but for some reason or another... They're going to have to force you. Like, they got a Democratic senator, and they had two senators until Zirinsky died. Yes. So, no, there are plenty of Democrats around. There are a lot of Republicans that would rather be Democratic than Republican. But you came here as a good Democrat, though, and you survived. Yep, and still am. You didn't back off. No. They didn't want to change you over to a Republican. Oh, they always want to change. It's like going to church. They want to convert you to their denomination. Well, religion and politics is very interesting. You can have two intelligent people, and they have completely opposing views. What makes it that way? Well, I don't know. I don't know. You don't have it that way in Sweden. Well, so many different parties, so forth. Yeah, yeah. But it's not as active. There's a lot fewer people in Sweden. In America, with all the different peoples there are, they can have room for divergent views and still be a member of the party. Would they confuse the political aspect of life in the United States, you think, if they had four or five different parties? Oh, I don't think it would be wise to have a number of parties. You don't think so? They wouldn't serve the... No, I think that would be very bad. Complicated. I don't think it's good for the constitutional government. It would be easier, like in Sweden, for instance, with fewer in the population. So have you compared the Democrats in the United States with the Democrats in Sweden, for instance? Well, not as... just because the name... Oh, you have read about it? Yeah, just because the name is Democrats. I don't know enough about what goes on in Sweden to... Do you think the philosophy is the same, though? No, I don't think so. Why? You ask me, I ask you. I mean, I got to ask you being over here. Well, I understand that, but I don't study politics. Like human rights, for instance. The Democrats seem to be a little bit more liberal. Not liberal, but I mean more righteous, if you say so. The Republicans are harder, in other words, they like to drive people. Well, the Republican Party has always been pretty much controlled in big business. That means they're against labor. So they've got to be a workers' party. Yeah. A Democratic. Yeah. Well, but then when you came here to Omaha, you got yourself interested in helping people, of course. And you came on different boards with the Lutheran Brotherhood and the federations of the Lutheran Church in America, of course. And you were trustee on the board for several years. And then with the hospital that you saw... I had a lot to do with that building and that hospital. Yes, I understand that. Tremendous lot. There wouldn't be a hospital there. It was on Saturday morning that it made the turnaround. And some people didn't believe it, of course. No, and they didn't like it either. But couldn't they see the changing neighborhood, the culture crunching on the neighborhood and everything? They didn't want to take on something more to do. For instance, the hospital administrator was against it. Was that Brayden? Brayder. Brayder. Brayder, yeah. But couldn't they see the writing on the wall? I don't know what people can see. You? I wonder sometimes. I mean, you saw it. I just knew that I had quite a little to do with land. And I knew that the population was coming west. If you look at it today, up there at Reddick Street or Reddick Avenue, whatever it is, the expansion is good to 2050. If you then look at Clarkson and St. Joseph and Catherine, they are in Buxton and there's no way for them to expand. No. Did you have a letter for me to sign? So, but were people behind you, though? I mean, after it was done. I understand there was a lot of aggression before it happened, but after it was done, not for instance today. Well. Will they come up and tell you there was a good move you did? Well. Or are they ashamed to come forward? I think a lot of them don't have the vision to see what happened. They didn't go through the trouble that we went through to get it. They thought it was easy. Yeah. Well, they didn't know what was all behind the scene. And we had to undertake lots of things that were significantly great. How about the doctors, though? Because they didn't care to... Well, the doctors, they wanted to run things. So I had to... One of the first things I did to them on planning the new hospital, I got a meeting with all of the doctors and told them, now you're not going to have anything to do with the board. What you're going to do is report to the consultants. And if they want to discuss something with us, they'll bring it to us. You told them they're playing... Yeah. Exactly. Clear off. They were there to listen to it. Yeah. What did they say then? Well, they looked at each other and doctors are a funny breed. Well, they like to be a little bit more... Yeah, they like to be further up than other people. So their intention was to go along with the move, but they wanted a piece of the cake. Well, they wanted to run things. They want to have their own administrator. Well, they wanted to feel that whatever's done, why they had to approve it. And you had the Dr. James that was running things. Yeah, Larry James, he was an antagonist. But here, we can look at this aspect too. I mean, Emanuel had shortage of money. What? They had shortage of money, Emanuel, in other words. Sure, sure, sure. So here comes this Dr. James with money. No, he didn't have much money. Yeah, but he had some equipment, did he? Well, a little, but not much. But he wanted to have return on that money, whatever he put in there. Well, he was very anxious to get control so that he knew that if you're going to have a big hospital that way, there'll be some auxiliary things, collateral things. And he wanted to be the owner. He wanted to be the boss of it. I see. See, if you needed a CAT scan, for instance, he wanted to buy it and then get return of payment in kind or whatever it takes. Who's talked to you about that? Well, I talked to a lot of people. You know, I think you mentioned before a little bit, and I remember. Because there are significant steps that people don't know about. Well, Larry is not on the board anymore. I don't know what he's doing, but probably not very much. And especially at that time, you came in to Emanuel and on the board, and everything was changing up to the neighborhood and everything. Did the neighborhood change on the south side as drastically as on the 42nd Street up there? No, you mean... Why did they heave themselves on the Swedish people, the colored? No. They seem to come in all wrong. The Swedes, one of the problems with Swedes is they're too easy taken in. Because the Polacks and the Italians didn't let them in. No, no. What did they do? Well, it's easy to take a Swede in. Why? Because he's going to listen to you. I've noted that. I've told my wife that many times, especially when I kind of in jest tell her that she took me in. And that's, I mean, my current wife. And she didn't even have to fire a bullet? No. Yeah, but there was the question about the economic conditions. I mean, with more and more moving in and the reduction of prices on housing. Oh, it was terrible. Terrible. Sure. They wanted the hospital to stay there as a fortress. Yeah, and get like it is down at Clarkson and the university. Because if I take a ride in the car, today, from the old place up to Reddick or 72nd Street, you can do it in 15 minutes. Well, my goodness, it took seven years of my time. But they said it was too far away for an emergency. Well, some of them said that. There was all kinds of talk about what was wrong with it. Some of them didn't want to put themselves into an antagonistic view with the black people. So they were, like you said, a little bit afraid? Yeah. So you had to face both sides, the black and the... There was two men, this other fellow's a Dane. His name was Cliff Nelson. And Cliff Nelson and my own work, there was several other people that could have been more active, like Carl Falk, he's a Swede, but Carl stood under the brush. So it resolved itself so that Cliff and I were really the fellows that took the heat. So when you signed that paper that Saturday morning, you actually were the owner of it? Because you didn't know if the board was going to... Yeah, Cliff and I, we didn't sign it. But the paper got ready so it was signed on Monday. We'd made the decision up there. But you didn't have the board meeting before, though? No, no, goodness, the board meeting was... They had regular times for the board meeting. But news got around that we'd bought it. And we bought it with the understanding that if they didn't want it, we'd take it and dispose of it to probably the same fellow that was trying to buy it. When they called me on Saturday morning. So did the people say then that you were making your own deal and pressing the board into a decision? Well, to a certain degree, some of them thought that, but... Swedes are another group that wanted to be led. What were you thinking then when you came for meetings like that? Did you say in your mind that who's done... Well, I worked so much that I didn't know what to say. Did you say in your mind that who's done... Well, I worked so much on that that it's difficult for me to adequately express what took place. You were mad at them, of course, because you... I never get mad, I get angry. Which one is worse? Well, angry, you can be angry and get over it pretty fast. If you get mad, you've got a disease. And that's madness, it's hard to cure. But you were thinking, I mean, you are the same nationality, you're the same thinking and the same structure, that you could be able to talk to them, but... And they were mostly Swedes, though, you had to deal with. Well, not mostly, there were quite a few Swedes. The first nation was Danish. And then you had the doctors against you. Yeah, yeah. But we won. If you're for the right thing, why you win? But there's history now that was written. I have to agree with you, I mean, history should be presented the way it was. You got a copy of my letter to Lund. Very, very interesting. This is exactly what history should be all about. Because there is no use to spread the roses where there's not supposed to be any. But Lund... Why did he appeal to Roland? I don't know why he... Probably they wanted the other kind of history, the exalting history, pictorial thing. Yeah, so... It wasn't to my liking. Maybe the doctors were behind stopping some of the... Well, I don't know, they liked to control things. But the doctors that you had to deal with, they are not on the staff anymore. Well, no, there were several doctors that were very fine, like Dr. McGugan, he was a tremendous... He was the fancy one, the ones that swirled around in Omaha. Yeah. Everybody in society wanted to have a baby, they wanted McGugan there. He was the first entrance to life. Then they were on the rise. Yeah. And he had a special nurse also. Yep. Really high class living here. There were several nurses, though, that he would relate to, but if it was one that was really up on the upper end, I forget what the name of the lady was, but... Harriet? Yeah? Do you remember the lady that kept Dr. McGugan so much? The nurse? The nurse? Oh, Miss Tingley? Miss Tingley. I remember that name. Yeah. But they cost a lot of money to have her come through. Well, I don't know. The Swedes didn't afford that, the regular Swedes. Well, it wasn't the Swedes that had the money. It was the... Let's see. The businessmen and the entrepreneurs. Yeah, well, the... The society folks. Society folks. Like Jerpy and Carl A. Swanson. Well, Jerpy was not a... He left... He left in 29, I guess. Yeah, in 29, so... No, he wasn't... No. Jerpy didn't have much money, and neither did Carl Swanson. Yeah, the handing... But he handed over a tremendous company, though, this commander. Later on, he grew, and he had lots of spunk about him. So he... Jerpy was kind of the beginning, but Carl Swanson was one that made it into a... Into a......common place. They were commissioned for him first. Yes. And then when Carl got anxious, why, they took on a lot of other things. Processing of poultry, and... Oh, just an awful lot. He made ice cream up in Worthington, Minnesota, and very good ice cream. He had had some experience over in Sweden. He came over here when he was, I think, 18 years old. And his sisters had come here before him. So... Then he started out at Wahoo, Nebraska. I think his first job was on a farm out there. Say... What? Would he be interested in reading the Swanson story? He might. We've got a couple extra copies. You can send it back to me. Oh, yes, I will. Yeah. I'll see if I can find one. You know, I have read some about it, but there was O.M. Nelson. He was one of the editors, Omaha Post, years ago. Where? Omaha Post. O.M. Nelson. He wrote the book in 1934. I don't remember him. But Carl A. Swanson was not that big at that time, so he came in a little bit after. So, but did he contribute money in the later years to Emanuel at the oil place? Who? Swanson. Oh, he did quite a little contributing. But he was reluctant to give, though, because it was in a bad location. Yeah. Don't you think so? Well, a lot of them didn't like it. So when he asked, if you ever asked him, you were not on the board when you were working with Swanson. No, and I didn't ask him for money because I was working, doing lots of his work. And it was just wrong, a conflict. Yeah, I see. But you wouldn't have recommended him giving money to the place up there? Well, if it was built right, then I'd recommend it. But it was outdated. Yeah. They only had two operating bays. Two bays. And one delivery for bays. I wrote all that in my... It was very, very interesting. Tremendous interesting. Gives you a light, you know, what happened. And those darn Swedes were not easy to deal with. Had it been easy, you think, if you had Germans and Polacks and Italians? No, I think Germans are awful stubborn, but so are Swedes. But Germans are more towards wanting to lead. The German people are just normally out to lead. And they've done it pretty well over there, even now, they're leading. But there's something about growing up under a family of either Swedes or Germans or Italians or so forth. You take on your background. Also the short student. But what you said about the Swedes now here on the colored encroaching. Yeah. Do you think they gave in easy? I mean, were they too easy on it? To give in and sell the horses? Colored? Yes. Oh, they saw that they couldn't win. There was no real leadership in the black family or black organization. How is the area today now around that place? Well, it's quite a bunch of blacks. You haven't been up there, huh? Well, I've seen it, yes. And the hospital is gone. It was running for a year or so. They gave it to them and it didn't work. No. There was no leaders. Yeah. So that group, they didn't have any leadership either. They were drifting apart all over the place. But I'm talking to people now, and I met some of them up at the Immanuel. When you look at that place, you know, anywhere you stand there, it is really a landmark. It's wonderful. Yes. But they don't seem to understand it or they don't want to give credit to the people behind it. Well, is that me? No, no names mentioned, but what I usually say. Why, um, I talk to at this banquet now, for instance. You know, the people that were actually moving the hospital to this new place, I think they should have given them a little bit of light in the sun. Well, I do myself, but I'm not that niggardly. No, no, but I mean the sitting board should have given thanks and recognition. Yeah. Well, a lot of things that don't go just the way you want it. No, but I mean, there's usually the facts. Yeah, well, I know. The facts are there. Well, you can go down to the World Herald and get the facts. So it was written up in the papers, then? Yeah, there was some writing in there. Not like it was, because Immanuel has grown up to be a tremendous organization in this town. I mean, they sort of booed almost the thought that Immanuel could do what has happened up at 72nd Street. So was that because there was pastors in the leadership, you think, that gave it less respect? Well, a lot of it was. Cyrenius wasn't a good man. He was a nice fellow, but he didn't have any leadership about him. He didn't have the spunk to be a good man. So it was the deaconesses that were running it then? No, the deaconesses do a great job. The Lord really helps the deaconesses. They really have been hardworking and cleanliness and everything. It was known as a clean hospital, the Lord of Immanuel. Always been. Yeah, always has been. Wonderful nursing care, and still is. Yes, it proves it today. No question about it. Looking at your achievements here over the years, they are more than the Swedes that made good use of you. Was it easy to work for those people? Oh yeah. More pleasure for you? Well, I had to work, and the more I worked with different people, the more I found out how to do things. But the Swedes, they were a little bit reluctant to say thank you. Yeah, the Swedes should have been much more honored here in Omaha than they were, and that's partly because the Swedes didn't do it. So Governor Exon, you were a good public, I mean, personal friend of his. Well, pretty good. If we meet now, I can speak very personal to him. He's still in Washington, D.C. Yeah, yeah. Jim Exon, dear Jim. And he calls me Cecil. Oh, well, that's... He was here in the early 70s, the governor.