 I have today the 16th of June 1987 and I sit together with Joseph Willem Willemson in Rockford, Illinois. He was born 1893, the 2nd of January in Thun, Västergötland and came to America in 1910. So you went that way over Norway because you had a sister there. Yes. Who was married? She was married to a Norwegian. Yes. Albin Rosenberg. Did she go over to work in Norway or how did it go? Well, I think we had some relations there. So in that way she became Norwegian. Yes. And you were the last in a group of nine children. Yes. So when you grew up most of them went out of the house to get a job elsewhere. And dad was a farmer. Yes. How big of a farm did he have? About 60 acres. So he had 10-15 cows and a couple of horses. Yes. And you went to school in Thun and were confirmed in Thun church as well. Yes. And you got help in the farm when you grew up. Yes. You went to the fields with cows. Yes. And you learned to plow and to plow. Yes. How long did you stay at home? Did you work outside the farm? I left home when I was 16. 16? Yes. Was it an older brother who took over the farm? No. My dad still was the big shot. I see. Yes. But you were not interested in staying at the farm? No. See, I got acquainted with a guy a year before, one that he worked for my uncle. And he went to this country and he kept on writing letters all the time. So he told me, if you want to come, I got work for you. And you ain't got nothing to worry about. You can start work right away if you want. And that was 1910? Yes. Do you remember now if it was hard time in Sweden to get a job because of the big strike? No. It was easy to get a job? It wasn't bad. Of course for a 16-year-old boy, it was harder. You didn't go into Trollhättan or Vennesborg to get a job? No. You stayed on the farm then? Stayed on the farm. So when you got those letters, did you tell your father then you were to go to the United States? No. What did he say? Oh, he didn't mind it much. No? But you were the last one though. He had two sisters here. In Rockford? No, in Montana. Montana. And they had left long before you? Oh, yeah, long before. So they were married? No, they were married. To ranchers? Or farmers? No, I don't think. Well, no, they wasn't farmers. They had jobs, but I don't remember where it was. Did you meet them at any time here in... No, I didn't meet them. You never saw them? No. So, your brother then... No, there was two aunts, you said. They were here. They didn't send any tickets to you or anything like that? You came to your friend? Yeah. Here in Rockford? No, in Wisconsin. Oh, Wisconsin? Argyle, Wisconsin. Argyle? Argyle. Where is that located? It's close to... That's 50 miles from Monroe. Oh, Monroe. So this is a little bit west of here then? Yeah. And this friend of yours, now, what was his name? Victor Anderson. Victor Anderson. And he was a tune too? Well, he was around there. Did he send you a ticket or... No. You had money yourself? I had my own. So you had to write to the king then to get permission to emigrate? No. You didn't? No. What did you get over though? I mean, you were only 16. Just buy a ticket. Just buy a ticket? Yeah. But you had to go to the pastor though? Yeah. Yeah. You get betyg, they used to call it. Ufrigtis betyg? Yeah. So he didn't say anything to you when you came there or... You remember? Many, many years ago? No. I don't remember. So you've been here 77 years? Yeah. 77 years. So did you tell your parents when you left that you were going to come back after a few years or what did you say? Well, there was always in mind to go back when you could afford it, see. But you had no idea what it was like over here? No, but I was in the army, in American army. I served over in France in 1918. Oh, you did? Oh yeah. And I wouldn't have had to go, but I enlisted. There was about six boys in that territory over there who worked there. And we all went and enlisted in the army. Six Swedish boys? All Swedes? No. There was some of us Norwegian. Oh. Yeah, that's quite a while ago too. Yeah, that's many years ago. So you were drafted then? I wasn't drafted. I enlisted. Yeah. And I got some money, time since, that I wouldn't have to go because I enlisted and didn't have my papers yet. I got my papers when I was in the army. Oh, I see. So then you became a citizen? Yeah. 1917 or 16? No, 18. Oh, 1918. Oh. So you went to your sister in Norway and took a Norwegian ship over. Did you stay for a while in Norway then or just visit her and left? Visit her a week or so. I see. But there was a regular boat, one of them big ones. They went straight to the United States? Yeah. And I know the first day when we landed in New York, I had already started to shoe snuff because my dad shoed that. And I had that, so I saw it to sale. So I bought the box and there was only a nickel a box. And I had a dollar for the snuff. So then you started for good then with the shoe snuff? Yeah, of course there was times like in the army, there was places where you couldn't get it and then you didn't have it, but I still got it. Snuff. So you shoed snuff then for about 77 years? Yeah. I asked the doctor one time if I should smoke. No, he said, you should have seen you were 16 and they never caused you any trouble. They wouldn't hurt you now. You never smoked? No, I never smoked. Oh, a cigarette maybe when you was out. But now it's steady, I never smoke. But I always shoe snuff. So how was it now at Ellis Island in New York when you came in there? Did you have any trouble to go through Ellis Island? No. No? You had the medical when you came ashore there? Did they check you out, the lungs and the heart and your eyes? Oh yeah, you went through that. Different stations? Yeah. But you went through? I went through, yeah. And then you took the train to Chicago? Or to Milwaukee? How did you? I don't remember how we did that, but we went to Chicago and then to Monroe where I had a job come waiting for me. So this guy now, his name was, you said? Victor Anderson. A farmer and he had a job for me for another farmer. So you were close together then? Yeah. It was a little ways, you know. But that was a little bit different though to go behind a couple of mules, a team of mules and horses in the town? There was horses there. You had a Halle Hunderberg, you know. Here you had nothing to look at. No. You were pretty close to Venen though? Oh yeah. Sure, you just had a ride out there. So what was the difference now between being a farmer in Toon and outside Monroe in Wisconsin? Well, there was a lot of difference in the work. There's one thing in Toon, if you was a man, you never done an American. The women's, not all American at all. There was their job and no man. And when you come here, the first thing you have to do is go to barn and milk when you work for a farmer here. Did you write home in your letters that you were milking cows over here? I don't remember where I wrote. But you had to learn milking then? You had to learn to milk? Oh sure. Oh yeah, that was the main thing for a hard man, was good milk. And that was by hand? By hand. Did he have a lot of cows then at the time? Was he big? Oh, he had about 30 cows, 25, 30 cows. And there were about two people then to milk? Oh, there was only four. Four. And because I learned I could milk fast. You got the hang of it? Yeah. How long did you stay on that farm? Oh, I stayed about a year and then I worked for the other farmer. But I worked on the farm for a good many years. Were they Americans or Swedes? Well, there was Norwegians. There wasn't many Swedes there. But it was crazy to get them Swedish hard men. But there was no Norwegians to farm it. Were they good to work for the Norwegians? Oh yeah, it was okay. I never had no trouble with any of them that worked. Did they raise any tobacco around there? No, they didn't raise any tobacco where I worked. But there is an area with tobacco farming there. Yeah, but some of them did. So then you and your friend Victor Anderson, did he stay on his farm too so you could be together? No. During the weekends or? We worked for different farmers. But you were able to get together though? Oh yes, yes. Oh, we went to dances and things like that. Did he have a car? No. How did you get around then? Did you have to use a bicycle or did you? No, a horse and buggy. A horse and buggy? Where you went to dances? And I hadn't been, two years I guess, I bought me a really nice horse and a buggy. Of course I got him on pitch here someplace. So that's the way we used to get around on nights and things like that. So you had saved up enough money then so you could buy your own horse and a buggy? No. And you could have the horse then on the farm you worked? Yeah, and you kept your horse. And that was your horse to, when you had some leisure time you just took him out then? Took him out. So you got a girlfriend up there in Wisconsin then? No, I didn't bother the girls. No? Oh, she went to dances and things like that but as far as I could study with a girl I never did. And I had a chance too at all, there goes, but that didn't interest me. So did you join any organizations up there or church or anything? There was no Swedish church around there? No, but I used to go to church. Norwegian church? Yeah. So there was not too many Swedes around there? No, there wasn't too many. And how long did you stay up there then working for farmers? I stayed up there until I went in the army. Oh, to 1918? Yeah. I see. Then you enlisted? Yes. How about Victor Anderson, did he go too? No, he was older. He was older? Yeah. So you enlisted then and where did you go then in the service? Down south, Texas or? Let's see. Well, that didn't take long because we felled a division that was ready to go but we hadn't had too much training. But I know that the army that I belonged to felled a division that went across. Shipped over immediately? So I didn't have much training in the army. But I was a wonderful shot, very rifled. What did you learn? I learned that at home. At home? And my older brother, he was wonderful. Marksman? Yeah. So I know before we went in the other army, they took us on a plate to show how good we were. So we got rifles we never used before. So the first shot I got, I said, let's rifle shoot to the left. But I said, it'll make a difference. Now I know they shoot to the left. So next fire, that was bullseye. And he said, you're a damn good shot, William. Yes, I said, I know I am a pretty good shot. Because at home, I used to go with my older brother and he used to go and hunt the roe deer, they called them. Yeah, roe deer. Yeah. And he was a good shot. That's what I learned. You didn't belong to the shooting club? What? You didn't have a shooting club? No. So you went overseas then to France? Yeah. And you were in the battles too? Oh yeah, I served over in France in the army there. Against the Germans, of course. How many months were you there then? Well, there was a quarter of a month. I don't remember. And you came away untouched? Yeah. You had no gas or anything? There was a lot of gas? Yes, yes. You had? Yeah. But it didn't affect you or anything? Yes, it did at the time. Most of the gas was in it. But you were cured for it? Yeah. Did you get any compensation for it? Well, I get a little now. About five hundred a month. From that service? Oh, I get a little. So after serving in France, you didn't go to Sweden at that time? We tried to, but there was too much money. So they wouldn't let us. None of us could go. We could make it in about a day at that time. And now, I don't know. No way you could do it? No. Did you, when you came into the army in 1918, were you able to speak English then? Because you'd been on the farm for so many years and they didn't speak too much English, I understand. Oh, I could speak pretty good. And you had no problem understanding or? No. See, there was about four years. And you learn a lot if you want to learn. Well, it was eight years then, from 1910 to 1918. Eight years. And then you became a citizen? Yeah. Automatically? Automatically, yeah. And when you came back then, you came to Rockford then? No, I came to Wisconsin, Argyle, Wisconsin. You went back again too? No. And then you started to work there? I even had a car when I came back. A car I kept up there while I was in there. A Ford. I had a letter from my brother when I was over there. He said the cars went up and I thought, he said, I can sell that car of yours for 400. So I told him, yeah, you can sell it, but put the money in the bank in my name. But he didn't sell it, so he wasn't able to come back. So one of your brothers then had came to, he came to Wisconsin too? Yeah, I had two, three brothers. They came? Yeah. And their names were? Siegfried and Adolf and Gunnar. Did they come to Wisconsin when you were in service then or before? No. I think it was before. Did you help them with the ticket coming over here or were they able to pay? Well, maybe I did. I don't know. You had the guarantee for them though? No, we didn't have the guarantee yet. At that time? At that time, no. So they all three came up there to Wisconsin? Yeah. And they all turned out to be farmers. I see. And they bought farms then or rented land or how did they? They rented farms. And it was close to Monroe? What? It was close to Monroe, Wisconsin? Yeah, it was between Monroe and Argyle and that farm country there. So, and they married and stayed there for? Yeah, and I had a father come and told me to tell me hello from my brother's wife. I haven't seen her for years. But she's all right, but my brother died. How about you now coming back? Were you interested to buy farm land or rent land to be a farmer or? No, I never was intended to be a farmer. You had no interest? No interest in it because I didn't like all that milking. Be a farmer, so when I started to work and I quit the farm work, I went into construction. So, and I was pretty good at it. I was operating engineer. And so I can overhaul machinery and all that. How did you learn that? Did you go to school? Automobiles, that's what I learned. I used to overhaul cars. Many of my friends, Sunday didn't work. Oh, they like to have the car overhauled. So I used to do that for nothing. Just for practice? Yeah. So you became good at it? Yeah. So you started in construction up in Wisconsin? No, when I was down here in... Yeah, how did you come down to Rockford now? Did you have a friend coming up there or how were you told about Rockford? I don't remember. You had no idea at that time when you were in Oregon, there was a Swedish town down there, Rockford? Yes, we had heard about that. But you never went down there for dances or to meet people or anything like that? No. It was too far? Of course, you got acquainted, you had a young union, you know, when you worked on... So what year did you come down to Rockford? In 24. 24. So you joined the union then? Yeah. Which one, the machinists or carpenters, bricklayers or... Machinists. Machinists. Yeah. And I come to that red building over here in 1924. We got married in Freeport coming here. So you had met your wife then already? Oh, yes. How did you meet her? She was teaching in the school in Toon. Here in... In Wisconsin? In... Let's see now. Yeah, I met her in Wisconsin. And she was teaching at the school where I belonged to at that time, where the farm belonged to. So she had come from Sweden then about the same time as you? No, she wasn't Swedish. She was born in this country. I see. She was born in Wisconsin? Yeah, she was born in Wisconsin. So you met her then and then you married when you came down here to... You married in Freeport you said? No. And then we come to Freeport up to this house over here. Oh, the next one? Yeah, the next one. The big red house? I lived there for 22 years. So you rented it? I rented it. And I had two kids and... See here in this house, there's only one bedroom to each apartment. And I bought this house in 28, but I still lived over there and paid rent there and rented this out because I didn't like to hear them two kids in the same bedroom as you. But you bought this then? Yeah, I bought this in 28. How was the time here in Rockford in the 20s? Was it easy to get a job or make money? Well, I was never out of a job. I was working all the time. I worked 37 years for one contractor. Swedish contractor? Here in Rockford? Home and Page contractor. Were they Swedish, Home and Page? No. But that's funny, I got a job for a contractor. He wouldn't let me go. He would raise my wages, but no, he wouldn't let me go. So they figured they made a little money on me. So, but then during the Depression then, you didn't have any problems? You were still working? I was still working. During the whole Depression? No. So, was there more luck than brain or what happened? Because a lot of people bought houses in 28, 29 and they lost them because they couldn't get any income. No, I didn't lose them. I done a lot of work on that house. I had an old barn, red barn there and I tore the head on and I got five gardens there. And at that time, all you get for the garden in rent a month was $3, so there wasn't much money. They rented them to store cars in then? Well, yeah, I rented them at the time. Now my son is a contractor and he got a full of machinery, he can't get in there. I see. They were handy then to come in when I stole them. And that big house you have behind there, where is that? Is that a school or where is it? That's a school. A school. Which one? Kishwaukee School. Kishwaukee School. So you were right down town Rockford then? Yeah. You were close to Osnus Boulevard and 7th Street? Yeah. You were right in the heart where the Swedes were? Yeah. You didn't have to speak English even down here? Yeah, I did most of the time. You did? Yeah. But unless I had to, a lot of people... Most of the people here spoke Swedish though? Yeah, they did. There were not too many Italians or Poles or Lithuanians living down here? See, I could speak Norwegian just as good as any Norwegian. And I could speak French really good. You could? Yeah. You learned during the war you mean? I learned. But for the language, I learned them very quickly. You must have a French girlfriend over there during the war? No. How did you learn so fast? I only had one girlfriend and that was the one I married. That was Vera? Yeah, that was Vera. Vera Arnett was her last name. Arnett? Yeah. Arnett, what nationality was that? I don't know. It was long way back. But there was no Swedish blood in there? No. He was a post-material, a little torn. Freeport? Or up in Wisconsin? In Wisconsin. And she was about the same age as you then? Yeah. Born the same year? Well, I don't remember. Well, how that happened, that happened kind of funny. She come there to Toon as a new teacher. You went to Toon? No, you mean in Wisconsin? She came to Wisconsin as a new teacher? Yeah. You said Toon? I said Toon. Site 2, continuation with Joseph Williamson, Rockford, Illinois. Site 2. So how did you meet her then, Vera there? Well, the teacher is single and the farmer got her furnished and her meals and home. Room and board? Yeah, room and board. So then she was staying at the same place as I was. Oh, I see. And the boys was going to have so much fun with the new teacher, you know. So I thought to myself, well, I can fix that part of it. I can start over there myself. And so I did and it worked out really good. We went together about three years before we got married. Did you still have the horse and buggy at that time? No, I had the automobile then. Oh, I see. You had traded in the horse? No. Sure. What kind of car did you have? I had mostly Forge. I had different one. So you started to work on the cars then when you got one and you got handy with the... No, that's the way I worked. And you learn on one machine and that is easy to work on the next one. I had Pontiac and I had Chevrolet and I had Forge. So now when you came to Rockford and working for this construction company, what kind of machinery did you have to take care of at that time? There was bigger back horse and... Well, there was nexus and hoist and all that stuff. So you maintained the whole fleet then of... Yeah. See, in wintertime, we got messy. We had a big workshop on the company, the office. So that's why I never had a work. I had to go there and do something. I didn't give it just for the fun of it. I like to see the work go. I know one time, they had 40 wheelbars where they got to push concrete and things like that. So they was all there. I cleaned them all up and painted them. And then the timekeeper, he asked Big Shot, have you been in that building lately? No. He said, I haven't. Well, he said, take a look through there and see what you've done to your wheelbars. They was all cleaned, painted, ready to go to the next job. And all the machines was in the overhaul and ready to go to. See, like for hoist, they had about three different size machines. Oh, that's a lot of work, all right. How did they pay you, now, the company? I mean, when they had a good worker like you, they can depend on. Did they pay you a little bit extra then or bonus, vacation? Well, I guess they paid fairly good. They did? I know and I told them I should have a raise. That's nothing. You can have a raise. How often did you ask for a raise, though? I mean, were you shy of you to do that? Not very often at that time because the wages didn't raise very much. When I quit, when I quit there, it was only a dollar something. Of course, it was in 61 when I quit. So, during the Depression, did the company have enough work then to keep going? Oh, yeah. They had to lay off a lot of carpenters and bricklayers, though. Carpenters, bricklayers. They were laid off? Oh, they were. So, you bought this house then in 1928 and you are still in the same house? Yeah. And it looks in good shape? Yeah. You have maintained the house and the yard and everything you expect to spend? Of course, I spent a lot of money on this house. Like basement and porches and all that stuff. How long have you been without your wife? When did she die? It's about 12 years. So, you live alone here and take care of yourself? Yeah. You don't have anybody come in to help you or? Well, yeah, my daughter comes in and my daughter in law. So, both your children live here in Rockford? Yeah. So, they check up on you if you need something? Yeah. And of course, then I paid $50 a week for each one. So, do you still drive? What? Do you still drive? Do you still drive the car? No, I quit when I was 85. 85. No, I figured. And then when I quit, I had a letter from the company. I bought the license. Told me, a man with a record like you got can keep on driving. You don't have to quit. So, you had a good record? I had a good record. But I quit anyway. I always told the kids I will drive when I'm 85 and then I quit. And I had a car with only 3,000 miles on. I gave to one of my granddaughters. So, what church did you join here in Rockford? Did you join one of the Swedish churches here or? No. Your wife was non-Swedish, no? She probably didn't care about the Swedish? No, she didn't care much about the Swedish. Well, she had a good time. I took her to Sweden and we was there for three months. What year was that? Huh? What year was that? What year was it? After the war? Yeah. That was in 61. When you retired? Yeah. That was the first time you went back? No. I had been, I was back in 1914. That was the first time. Oh, you went back then? 1914. Why did you go back then? Both your parents were living then? Yeah, my parents were living there. Did you have an intention to stay in Sweden at that time? No, never. No? I figured I would go over there and make money. So, then you took your wife over in 1961? Yeah. That was the second time you went over? Second time. Then you were, well, you had brothers and sisters over there? Yeah. But your parents were gone? Parents were gone. And my brothers was over here. Did they go back, your brothers? No, they never went back either. They never went back? No. All three of them died up in Wisconsin then? Yeah. So, your wife went with you in 1961. What did she say now about Sweden? Oh, she liked it. She thought it was a wonderful trip. So, you stayed with your brother then or sister or how did you? I stayed with my sister. I had a stiff neck then. In Thun? Did she live in Thun or where did she live? My wife. Your sister? Oh, she lived on the farm. In Thun? Yeah. So, the farm is still in your family then? No, the farm is not in the family. And it's an awful big prize for that farm. But they ain't in the family. But, oh, that was a wonderful farm. I'll show you how the horse looked. So, that farm was sold then? It was sold. When you came back in 1961, you didn't like it in 1914, but how about 1961? You said your wife liked it very well. Yeah. How about you now? Did you feel at home the nature and the Halle Hundenberg, Lake Venen, Jyrken? Yeah. I saw all of that when we was there. How did you feel then? Were you homesick then, I mean to stay there for good or? No, that didn't bother me. It didn't bother you? No. How about all the friends that you went to church, confer with, or school mates? Were they still living at the time, some of them? Sure. You met some of them? I met some of them. What did they say? Did they ask you about what you were doing over here? Sure, yes. What kind of work were they doing? Were they farmers? Some of them were farmers. They stayed in the same area? Yeah. Do you remember, you had three brothers here, Siegfried, Adolf and Gunnar, and you, your four brothers, you came over here? Yeah. Somebody else from the same area that you know of that went over to the United States? Did they talk about that, as many left? No, I don't. You don't know anybody else from the area that has been here in Rockford, for instance? Were you the only one from Thun here in Rockford? Yeah, at the time. Now it's different, I guess. Did you join the Wächterklub in Rockford? No. You never belonged to that one? No, I never joined any clubs. No clubs? No. And no church either? Well, I always went to church, but I didn't. Which church then? Well, now mostly that's Jehovah's Witness. Jehovah's Witness? Yeah, they come every week. So you know Harry Olsson then? What? You know Harry Olsson? Harry? Yeah, my guy. Harry Olsson, yeah, he's a Jehovah's Witness. Yeah. Han är halvledning. Oh, that's right. So you stayed home for three months then, 1961? Yeah. How about your children, your son and daughter, did they go with you at the time? No. They never been to Sweden? No. Are they interested in Sweden? Yeah, my daughter was there last year. Your daughter? Yeah. What did she say? Oh, she was talking about the wonderful place that used to be our home. So she could see the place, and she took the picture of your birthplace? Yeah, she took the picture. So she liked the trip? She liked the trip. Well, we had a wonderful place there. Great big orchard, and everything was born and buildings was in good shape. So in this place, what should I say, it was the sky high, so there was none in the family that could buy it. Did your dad write to you and ask you if you want to buy it? No. They always say in Sweden, you know, we skrive till Amerika, dom är rika där över, dom har nog köpat. They didn't write to you about that, to buy it? No. If you had the money at that time, would you have bought it then, 1914 for instance? No, I don't think I would. You had more interest in going back to Wisconsin? Yeah, or to Rockford. Yeah, I could have bought that big house next year for 12,000. But that was a lot of money though. It was a lot of money. In the 1920s. Yeah, but that's a big house. So this is an apartment house then? It used to be. There was only three apartments when I lived there, but now there's more. But I don't know what kind of outfit they got it now. But I would have bought it then if I had the 12,000 right there. But I didn't have it at that time. How much did you pay for this house then in 1928? In 1928? 4,000? I paid 6,000. 6,000? Yeah. So then you stayed there and you worked till 1961 in one stretch? Yeah. You were never laid off then during the Depression? No. It's unheard of though. Most of the Swedes, they went two, three years without work. You came into the right field. Yeah. How about your son now? Is he interested in Sweden if you talk about it? Or did he ask any questions about it? No, he don't care about Sweden. No? No. Well, I think he would go over there and visit and all that. But your daughter now, she became more interested after she made a visit over there? Oh yeah. Before she went there, she didn't ask too many questions about it? No. Is there something specific she saw that she wondered about, she asked you about, she wondered about? No, not that I can think of now. But we had an awful lot of relation there. I remember a lot of people of the old time, Herman Hallström and Thore Blom and, no, Henry Blom, the mayors, Volker Bengtsson, the police chief, Bar Green. Well, there was the big shots at the time. But I mean, you saw them though. No, I saw them, yeah. Did you talk to them at any time? Because they were Swedes. Well, I suppose. You had no reason maybe not to talk to them. No, I didn't have no interest. And they would say, oh, he'd like to hang around with the big shots. So I didn't want that. So you never belonged to any groups or organizations? No. Here now you live on 613 Union Street. That must be one of the shortest streets in Radford. Yeah. That is pretty short. Very short. Yeah. Going from Kiswok in the east to down to, no, it doesn't go down to the river. Well, that goes down to the river, but different. Different name. Yeah. So you've been living very centrally located here in Radford. You, easier to get downtown, as we call it. And 7th Street, that's not too far away either. No. Therefore you had all the Swedes? Yeah. Used to be. Some people was hanging around there all the time. All the time. Got drunk. I never hang around with that bunch because I was busy and- You were working. That didn't interest me. I used to take a drink, shot and a beer. That was about all. And we worked out of town a lot of times. I always had a car to drive. I had a guy who rode with me and worked on the job. So I told him when they start riding with me, well, if we ever stop, there's a shot and a beer, then we go home. We was working out of town. So he got that and he was riding with me, you know. He was hanging around the tavern. There was a limit. There was a limit. Shot and a beer. Shot and a beer. And a little snuff once in between, though. Oh, yeah, but didn't figure that. During the Depression, there was a tough time in Rockford, though, during the Depression. There was a tough time for a lot of them. They lost their houses and- Yes, I think so. They closed the bank up here on Broadway. Yeah. And so there was hard times. There was hard times. But I was working all the time. They didn't affect me much. When you married your wife, now Vera, did she quit school to be a teacher then? What? When you married Vera, did she stop teaching then or did she continue teaching? No, she stopped teaching. She stopped teaching. No. She never worked outside the home then? No. At any time. She stayed home and took care of the children. No, I think in later years, she done- had little work. Not much, but- Your son, now, he became a contractor. Yeah, he's a mason contractor. Oh, mason. On brickwork. Was he with you in your company then to learn the trade or how did he get started? Well, I still kind of tried to learn them when he was a kid. He built a chimney and things like that and had a brickwork run out there. And he done that just to learn. And he built a smoke deck for the neighbors for nothing, just to learn. That's the way he learned. He's trained. But you were not a bricklayer, though? No. I'm not a bricklayer. So he had to go to Herman Halston then to learn the bricklaying? Yeah, he learned it all right. Yeah, there's been a lot of Swedish bricklayers in Rockford. Yeah. In the company you worked for now, they were not- they were not Swedes? No, they weren't Swedes. No, how many- Well, some of them weren't, they were Swedes. How many were Swedes to the one you worked with? How many- how big company was it? Was it 10, 15? Oh, yeah, it was more than that. How many were Swedes of that bunch? Well, all the carpenters and all the bricklayers were Swedes. So you had to talk Swedish many times then with the- Oh, yeah. If there's something that you remember from Sweden, you were 16 when you left. No. Is there anything specific that you remember from way, way back then? You always- you only worked for your father on the farm. You didn't take any work for somebody else? No, no, for the father. For the father, yeah. Was he easy to work for? Oh, yeah. You could talk to him and- Sure. Yeah, I never had no trouble with my father or mother either. But you wanted to go west? No. And he didn't see me go because they didn't put anything up against it. But they didn't think I should. Figured I was too young. Only 16? 16. So your dad, he had to sign then a paper? Well, I don't remember if he had to sign anything or not. I doubt it if he did. Because he was a so-called big shot in the county a little bit. Oh, I see. He was in the politics? Well, some.