 This is cassette 2, side 1, continuation with Carl and Henry Berzerius in Largo, Florida, and we have 27th of January, 1987. Cassette 2, side 1. We were talking about losing savings and the bank closing up and so on. Do you think that they were afraid to talk about it because it made them look stupid, in other words, they made a bad judgment? Nobody could help it, of course, but there's always when you buy a lemon to a car, you don't want to explain it to your neighbor because you should have known better, they say. People usually say that, you know, hindsight, you should have known better. Do you think there was one of the reasons they didn't want to talk about it? Well, I don't know. I would say that at that time, the head of the household, which was the father, what he said went. He didn't ask the kids for their advice or the mother. The mother just went right along, and it was a different family environment then than now. You have a big gathering and you discuss these. You see, what changed our lifestyle in this country was World War II when the women went to work in the factories and got away from the home and got out and started making their own. And then Prohibition was repealed and they started hanging around the bars and everything else. I think we had a downplay of the family unit. Before then, I think we had a strong family unit with the father at the head of it and the wives, they never worked except as domestics or helping here and there. But generally speaking, the place for the wife was in the home, raising the family. And no politics. Yeah. So it was a silent party. Yeah. And whatever Papa said, that was it, period. And so what the finances were, that was no concern of the kids. They were very private. But if the kids worked and you had to contribute something to the family pot, fine. But as far as discussing the family finances, I don't recall that ever happening as a child. Like in your family, your dad, he was the boss, deciding what to buy and not to buy. Right. But how about your mother, don't you think she had She went along with what he said. She never Well, she did. I didn't know it. Discussed anything No, they discussed that in private then because How about you two? You came in to command her here. Well, I think What did you decide? In other words, was his word the last? Well, I don't know. I think I have played a very important part of his life because we have talked things out together. We decide, one or the other decides, well, what do you think we should do? And the one who gives the most plausible thing, that's what we do. And we never fought over money. We never fought over anything because we talked about it before we did. So we had a very happy marriage. We both have to work at it because I think It's a team effort. Yes, because a woman could, I'm sure, bring in a lot of sensible things and see it in a different practical way. Different than a man can. Because I always wonder about some of the families that came from Sweden with 12, 14 kids, it wasn't unusual. How could they feed all that group when the woman in the house was the one they had to have? The man didn't put it on the table. He worked for it, of course. She had to prepare the meal. And I think that's why I was able to appreciate what my mother had gone through during those years we were growing up. A lot of kids of today, they don't live it on. But I've always felt that my mother earned everything that we could ever give her. Because she kept the household wonderful. She was a good housekeeper. We had good food. And we were taught right from wrong. And we'd get punished if we did something that wasn't right. So growing older, you have understood this much better, of course. Immature. Yes, immature. Because at the time you thought everything was going to fall in place. Yes, that's right. Day after day. You mentioned something interesting, you know, that the Second World War, of course, brought the women out of the countries. Did they change the ideas of the values in the family then? Oh, definitely. Definitely. Because she made her own money. Second income coming in. And so then they wanted a better standard of living. And that's why people today get into trouble when one of them loses a job. They can't support the standard of living that they have adopted for themselves. And maybe it's the way it should be, but it isn't the way that the country was founded on a family unit. You lose that family unit. They had two cars instead of one. Yeah. Whereas we just piled in one car and my mother never learned to drive. So it has made an impact on me. You didn't have to work then when you married in 1937. No, I hadn't worked. You never worked. No. So there was like an unwritten rule where you married, your place, the woman's place was in the home, and raising the family and taking care of the family. Right. But today... And that's what I have been doing. They have a psychological breakdown if they stay home two hours a day. Yeah. Well, I tell you, you get cabin fever once in a while. But you know how to cope with it, though. Yeah, that's right. And you have to learn. So the good Lord gave me good common sense. And I know how to use it. So second, we're brought on a bad idea of this that they could work. I was stationed out in San Francisco and you hear these Greyhound buses. You'd see these little Italian women wheeling those big Greyhound buses down the street. How they ever were able to manage them, I don't know. But that was the changes that took place. And then they went to work in the factories and every place else. That's what made a big difference. Yeah. And really spoiled the youngsters rotten. Because who got a car when they were 16 years old? Those days you didn't. You walked wherever. I had gone through, I remember one very winter day. It was 24 below zero. And I walked from my home to where I was employed. And I almost froze to death. But, Philip, we were instilled with it. If you had a job, you'd get there no matter how you get there. But be there on time. And I was on time. 24 degrees below zero. How many miles do you think that was between twice as many? Oh, about five or six miles. Walking in that 24 below zero. So this idea of giving the children a better life than they self-help. This is probably not a good philosophy, though. In other words, they give them something they actually don't need. Well, I think if you... Like giving them a car, for instance, when they were 16. I think what they need to do is teach the children to become self-reliant. Instead of having everything handed to them on a silver platter. Papa, I want this. Or Mama, I want this. They shouldn't have that. They should have to earn it. We had to earn everything that we got in life. But today, you've got... The kids want something, and you try to hold it away from them. Well, my friends, all this and all that. It's just a ring around the rosy. So it's a way of life that has to be changed. And I think the best way of changing it is right at the home. Get the family unity back. So then one of the parents should stay home and take care of the medicine. Live within the income of one, if it's going to be the man or the woman. But live within that income of one, not two. Because when they lose that second income, then they're in trouble. And they're going to lose it. Because what's happening here today is with all of the foreigners coming in. I'm speaking more of the Asiatics now and people of that ilk coming in here. And they're taking over, doing work cheaper than what we'll do it for. And then the blacks, being on relief, they make more money off of relief than they can washing dishes. That's what Reagan was right when he used to talk about page after page of people in Washington. They were advertising for jobs, but nobody wanted to take them. So they had to get more money off of relief. That's cockeyed. So that's tilted it the wrong way. I don't know how you're going to change it back. It's like a habit. It's hard to break it. It's like smoking or drinking. They have a tough time to get out of it. You can do that too if you have the willpower. I used to smoke about 30 years ago. And I said to myself, whose boss? You are those things. So every time I would go to get a cigarette, I'd say, okay, who's boss? So I'd go out in my kitchen and get a cracker. And it took me two weeks, and I haven't smoked since. So if you want to do anything, I don't care what it is, you can do it. But you have to have that will to do it. But you didn't change the cigarette for the crackers, though. Oh. I stopped the crackers two weeks before. I got 10 pounds in those two weeks. I gained 10 pounds. In two weeks? It took me two weeks to check myself. I don't know where I would have been today. I don't think I would have been alive. I'd have cancer on the throat or the lungs or something. But I stopped just what they call cold turkey. It's hard to do, but it can be done. So I haven't smoked in a long time. And now I can't stand other people smoking either. Because it makes me just as sick to have somebody else's smoke go past my nose than smoking. So smoking is a bad thing for people. You know, this man, the head of the relief office, told me about the Puerto Ricans coming into this country. They come in up to New York. So they get off the plane, and the only words of English they know is, We're a relief office. That's all they want, is where's the relief office? And when we live in Philadelphia, I'd be at that airport there on a Friday night, and you'd see all these Puerto Ricans going back home carrying little bags. Big bags. Big bags, yeah, paper bags of stuff. No luggage, but just paper bags of stuff, taking home their people. We've made it so easy with this relief program for people to come to this country and just get what they can. But don't they have to live within one area a certain time limit before they can cash in? They go right to the relief office. Maybe they have to use a different name or what. Look at the Mexicans coming across. That's what's hurting this country. It isn't like when the Swedes came here and the Germans and everybody else like years ago. They came in under certain quotas, and they had to be sponsored. And they came in, and they helped this country. But today, it's just like Eleanor Roosevelt. She got the niggers to come up into Pennsylvania for the votes. Pennsylvania was a strictly white German area, but that was one thing Eleanor Roosevelt did. Did she think of that person herself, you think, or did she have any mastermind behind it? Well, that I don't know, but I know that Delaware, which is quite a good Swedish community, they had the whipping post down there, and they kept the niggers in line. But boy, they'd get up to Philadelphia as fast as they could. And then they just spread, and boy, how they spread up there. We lived for 20 years in that Philadelphia area, and we saw that firsthand. What kind of work were you doing then up there? Building material. For the Army? No, no. I was vice president of Certainty Products at that time. You had a tie then from activities? No. Well, I stayed in the reserves. So during the war then, what happened then? During the war? Yes. Well... You went into active duty then? During the war years, oh yes, I was called back on active duty. And I was in Texas and in North Carolina and then San Francisco Port of Embarkation. I was out in San Francisco for better than two years. And then I was in Washington at the Pentagon for several years. So I got around a little all over. So you moved with your family then after the war? No, we had an invalid boy at the time, so she was staying in Rockford. So we paid our dues to the Army. There's a lot of moving and shifting around. How about your children now moving? Our daughter is here with us. Our boy is dead. But your daughter, how did she take the books to different schools? Well, she moved from Rockford to Park Ridge, Illinois, and then to Philadelphia. But she mastered it all right, so she didn't seem to suffer from it. It's always hard on the children. Yeah, that it is. Certain age groups. There was another thing that the Roosevelt area brought on, the REA, Rural Electrification Program for the Farmers. And it was up in Minnesota during that time. I'm sure you were there. There was a good program there to bring out. It was for the people that wanted it. I know when they went into West Virginia with it, people would get it, and then they would move further inland to get away from it. They didn't want it. Why? They were so used to being without it. They liked the kerosene lamps. Right, but the REA was a good program. But as you deal with different people, they get so set in their ways, they can't change. But the children coming along, they will change. I remember I had a very good friend who was one of the officials of the Latvian government, and he told me when Russia conquered Latvia, they took Latvia and Estonia and other countries there, he said, if they get by, in 20 years there will be a new generation that won't know any different, and they won't care. It will be Russian, it will stay that way. That's just like with Cuba. You got a new generation down there, that's all they're used to. And that's what life is all about, is if they fight, like right now all this anarchy over there in Beirut and all that, a new generation will come along, it will all be forgotten. And there are too few like you, for instance, to question what the scripture says. Don't you think people are more followers, so they like to take it easy and don't bother and mind things? Always. What will it be then if everybody questioned it? Well, you'll have anarchy. There will be a disarray. There's got to be a certain number of them. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So... So it's got to be a certain number to question things, otherwise... Right. We should always question. How about the press now? Do you believe what they say over the years? I have no confidence in the press at all, because they've got a bunch of rabble-rousers that are in the press today. They want fast news and... Yeah, and they want it their way. If it isn't their way, then they'll twist the words around to make it their way, and it's... I just... In fact... How about my getting a coat? Would you like to have a coat? Your parents, no. They didn't have any pension or Social Security. No. How did they manage not to... old age, to stay on and hospitalization programs, nothing? Oh, well, my father died in 1939, when he was 59 years old. And... So he was on the Tiger and even... Well, there was no retirement. And there was no benefit left to your mother? Nothing at all. Oh, I guess there was some hospitalization later on, but I contributed to my mother until she died. So you took care of her? Well, not alone, but I helped to supplement her income so she would have... was able to make it. But now, 50 years later, the young people don't even see they have the interest to support their families and to the parents' upkeep, and they're probably not able to do it anyway. It seems the grandparents are taking care of the grandchildren through college. Isn't it a strange situation? I think so. I think so. It's... They are living by their means. Today they are. I know my niece, she married a doctor, and they built themselves a $250,000 home. They don't need that anymore than the man in the moon, but they're able to... They got a smart tax lawyer, and so they write the thing off on their income. That's why I'm glad to see this tax reform package go through. Do you believe they will... It'll balance itself out. She told me the other day when I was talking to her that... She said, they're worried sick now because these HMO programs coming in, they're going to change their income, which will change their standard of living. Well, it should, because I think the medical profession has been milking the public dry. I remember how the doctors, they all fought Medicare. Boy, they didn't want any part of it. But boy, they learned how to milk it. So this family now with the $250,000 home, they could have a room for grandpa or grandma if they wanted to. They're not planning like that anymore. They'll probably have to, but they're not planning on it. Let's put it that way. So there's a different philosophy. That was one of the hardest things probably for the immigrants. Their grandparents didn't live with their grandchildren. Because they were left over in Sweden. Your grandma, she died in Sweden. And grandpa too. Same to yours. Same here. So I hardly remember either one. But I do have pictures of them, so I know what they look like. But when you're five years old, you don't retain too many memories. Because it was usually the habits of the old people, where they were sitting talking to their grandchildren. I remember as a kid, we'd drive by these poor farms. That's where the grandparents were. Not ours, but I mean people who couldn't support them. They had them on what they called the so-called poor farms in those days. Were they right in the city of Minneapolis? They had them be on the edge of town. Where people were left to live the rest of their days. Because the kids couldn't take care of them. And there was a farm then with dairy cows and sheep and what have you. So they would be self-supporting. But today they have the relief. Now they are playing bridge instead of American cars. Yeah. Or bingo. Yeah. You've been in this Largo area. Have you found the Swedish-American Society down there in Seminole? I heard about it, yes. Yeah. Do you belong to them? No, we went down there a few years back. But we kind of left it with a... They were hykfärdiga svenskar. Hykfärdiga svenskar? Ja. How come? I don't know. That's what they get. That's what they get. Some of them, the Swedish have a tendency of feeling that they're a little bit better than... So they become all swedes again? Yeah, I think you'd find it interesting though. You get somebody who does belong down there and go down there and you'd probably get some very interesting information. Do they meet once a month? I don't know what it is now. We never went back again because we were so... So you didn't feel at home there? No. You didn't feel at home at all. They didn't make you feel at home. It was different at that Swedish society up in Philadelphia. That was good. We enjoyed that. We were members up there. At the museum? Yeah. But down here we thought, we'll try it, you know. But they were really... So... You could feel... Are they withdrawn then? In other words, they don't want to be friends with you? How did you feel? It was very clannish. A certain group, cliques? Yes. And then... Because anyone who goes, had meetings every once a month would certainly know who the strangers in the crowd would be. But they made no effort... To come over and... No. And say, well, when I was... had to be hosted with Carl, when I'd have to go to these meetings with him, I would look to see if anybody was standing by themselves. And I would go up to them and introduce myself. And then see that they'd need somebody else. But there were the three of us just sitting like dummies. So that was the thing. I thought to myself... My mother used to call them... Out of so many people, Svenskeren, Fritiden, and so on. Now, that's just like some churches you go to around the country. I've traveled all over the country. I've been in every state in the Union. And you go to a church and they just ignore you completely. Because the minister might put his hand out and... Next, next. You know, just like a politician. But they just... Yeah. You don't go for this idea either, that they have in some churches, you should turn it on and shake hands with the person behind. Does that make any sense to you? Oh, it does if it's sincere. They use it for ten seconds, though. Yeah. But when you go out, they don't even know you. They never see you again. They couldn't recognize you. Too many gimmicks. Yeah. Well, you know, I'll never forget Dr. Foles up there at the Ardmore Presbyterian Church. I rode with him from Philadelphia to New York. And he was going up to Presbyterian New York City for his weekly meeting. He told me at that time, he says, you know, he says, we don't preach what we want to preach. We preach what they tell us to preach. And he had to go into New York every Tuesday, and then they'd be telling him what he was to preach on the next Sunday. And he had a very wealthy church there in Ardmore, Pennsylvania. In fact, J. Howard Pugh of the Sun Oil Company was one of his staunchest supporters. We went out to canvas. You know, we had to raise half a million dollars. It was a budget. This was some 20 years ago. Well, we raised it on a Sunday. That's the type of a congregation it was. And then they came in and said, oh, we forgot we got to build a Sunday school addition for another $300,000. And we can't go out and ask the congregation again. And J. Howard Pugh says, well, J. Howard Pugh said, I'll write you out a check for the $300,000. Just like that. Of course, he owned Sun Oil Company. And he took off his tax. Yeah. But there are good Christians in this world. There's a bunch of the other kind, too. So there's a difference between the immigrants when he built the church and... Yeah. I guess my grandfather used to be a minister up in Norway. Yeah, he was a Baptist. Yes, he was a Baptist. But I guess he was a stern one. He gave them the word of the law. This is it. The side two, cassette two. With television coming in, that keeps people home more and more. Like all the things that we had growing up, like the Masonic Order and the different lodges and everything else. People aren't interested anymore because they want to stay home and look at the booby tube. And see, yeah. And so that's changing our standard of living. So they were living differently. When they were living in an apartment, they wanted to come out to picnics and join people. Yeah. But once they got the house, they had a lot of things to do around the house. And they probably became a little bit more, well, old. And the young people don't seem to be too interested in lodges now, for instance. No. Did you go to any lodges or clubs in Minneapolis? Not in Minneapolis. What about your parents, Gustavus and Douglas? Yes, yeah. My dad belonged there. Oh, there were several different ones. Svenska Sällskapet? Not that one, but I remember at Christmas, we always had that Christmas party. Boy, down there, was it the Modern Woodmen? That was a... They probably rented that hall then. Yeah. It was a sick society. I mean, sick benefits. One was paid $2 a week or something like that. But... But you never joined? No. Because you came away from it. Yeah. Did you later on join the Masons then? Oh, yes. I'm a Shriner. So... And... Yeah. But the next generation, though, doesn't seem to be interested in large work and Shriners and Masons. They are dropping out. No. No. They... Do you recognize them? How about Swedish newspapers? Did they have Svenska Posten in Minneapolis, your parents? Oh, yes. We used to get that all the time. Svan Törnblad, he used to wander with the American Swedish Institute. Yeah. There was a Swede who made it good. He looked like every immigrant. Yeah. Kustray Gold. Yeah, he did. Do you remember him personally? No. No. I think that's the Swedish Museum now, isn't it? That house there on 26th and Park. Yeah. 2600 Park Avenue. Park Avenue. Yeah. Yeah. And how about Sweden? You went back... We were there. When you visited Sweden, you say? Yeah. It was 1966, was not the last time. The first time. We've only been there once. So did you go to your parents' birthplace then or your birthplace also? Oh, yeah. Yes. Norberg. Yeah. Norberg, all along there. Said she spoke better Swedish than the natives. She did. I spoke Swedish in Sweden. Tala Rosenska. Yeah. And this man said, you seem to be a very highly educated man. And we got to talking about Sweden. And finally he says, you speak excellent Swedish. He says, how come? But you see, this is what I learned when I was five years old. Yeah, but you never practiced, though. Yeah, we never practiced. Since you're married. But at the time that I was born, till I was five, we spoke Swedish. And evidently, I retained all that information. It's unusual, because most of the people, if they're unusual, after they marry in life, they usually forget about it. No. And so I think that was... Everybody was surprised at it. And he said, well, you talk... He said, you speak better than some of the Swedes around here. So I felt proud about that. Because you can't know too much. But you probably used some Swedish on Sjunde gatan, though, 7th Street. You met people there. I mean, it's not too often, no. No, I don't... No, I can't say that I did. I think I was... I think in working there, I think I was a bit more American. And so I don't think I ever spoken very much Swedish. How about your children? Are you never using any Swedish? No, she doesn't learn. She doesn't... She's not interested. I've tried to teach her, but... Has she been in Sweden with you? No, she was there by herself. She went with her high school group. Yeah, that's right. They made it. Here again is a younger generation, like she went to Europe. And then here two years ago, she made a trip to the Orient. You know, when all those... We've never been to the Orient, but the younger generation, they get around. So you have relation or you correspond with the Sweden? No. No connection? Well, I used to. But then you get busy in doing what you're doing. And then you don't have too much in common anymore, unless you live right there. So I've kind of dropped that, too. Well, we enjoyed Sweden. We will be visiting there. We enjoyed it very much. In fact, we got lost. We got lost in Sweden. The driver of our... Well, you better tell them about it. We went to Sweden, we went to Copenhagen, and then we went through Norway. That fjord country is beautiful. And we were... SAS went on strike, and we had signed up for a tour, three-day tour, from Oslo to Stockholm. And they went on strike, and we didn't know what was going to happen. But the bus pulled up there to Grand Hotel in Oslo that morning, and we went out there. It was a 44-passenger bus, and here was a driver and a guide and one woman in there. And I said, where's the rest of them? They said, that's all. It's just you and the five of us. And I had to get the bus back to Stockholm, so they were going to complete the tour. So we started out, and the driver had never made the trip before. He got lost getting out of Oslo. So I said, you're going the wrong way. And so he listened to me, so I had to read the signpost along the way to teach him how to get over to the Swedish border. And of course, he got into Sweden where he had to switch over to the left-hand drive, or the right-hand drive, I should say. But I thought it was so amusing. Here's a driver of a tour bus, and I have to show him how to get from one country to the other. So did you check up then on your Jöns Jakob Berzelius? No. We went to the park and saw the statue. Did you see some of Berzelius in Sweden? No, we did not. You have no connection with him? No. In fact, I didn't have all the information then that I have now. If I went now, I would probably do that. But we visited the home of my parents and Hjuldre's parents. So we got to meet the relatives on both sides and visited with them. So you got treated loyally. Yeah. That's wonderful. They had a wonderful family. So I understand this chemist, he had a summer home down there in Faderund, where your father was born or your… No, no, that wasn't the chemist. That was his… My great-grandfather had a summer… Edwin's my uncle, see, so that was the Army officer who had his home, his summer home there. In Faderund? Yeah, in Faderund. When I visited with… what would he be? He was with… oh, that was the United Nations. Oh. He was a murderer, a guy who… Oh, you mean Hammerfeld? Yeah. But… Doc Hammerfeld. Yeah, he was… Yeah, but I was thinking of your cousin who was with him at the United Nations. What was his name? Oh, that we visited. They had a place there. Out on the lake there. Out on the lake and it was just beautiful. But flies and mosquitoes, no, no, and screams and… I don't see how they could live there. Well, she said, well, what I would love to have is a hamburger. Your wife said that? No, the woman. It was a steak, honey. Was it a steak? And so I thought, well, gosh, maybe we can send her some frozen ones. But when I found out what the price was, I felt that I couldn't afford it. Because, you know, a big steak would be just something. But what was his name? Svan? Was it Svan? He was an aide to Hammerfeld. Hammerfeld. And she was a girl from way up north. You see, my instant recall isn't as good as yours. Well, it's hard to remember names, especially when you meet them on a trip like that. You have so many things in your head. And the bus driver is another thing you should expect. But are there any other questions you have here? When we were there in Fallerham, I had rented this car. I was driving. We went down to see my uncle, Martin Hallberg. And he had, now there again, it was a case we've been talking about with the parents splitting up and the grandparents having to raise the grandchildren. So he had these two boys that he was raising. And so we took them out for a ride. They were going to show us the countryside. And, of course, being a dumb American, I kept driving on the right-hand side. And this little kid sitting there, he said, Interpudencia, Interpudencia. And we had this convertible that we were driving. And, boy, they were sitting in that back seat, you know, so everybody could see them. And they were waving at everybody. He put his hand up, you know. Every time it passed, I thought that was a cute thing. I'm sure it was, by now. Oh, it was something. A shot. Yeah. And when we got back to the States, we sent one of them a football and one of them something else. Some kind of a thing. Yeah. End of interview.