 That is 20th of August 1986 and I'm sitting together with Helga Vesterby in Rockford, Illinois and her sister Esther Erikson also in Rockford, Illinois. And they were born in Olive, Scona. 19 of Friday, 28 of May. And Esther Erikson was born 19 of 9, 11 of November also in Olive. And came to the United States 19 of 10 in the May on Hele Olof from Copenhagen. So if we start now with your parents, Mrs. Westerlund, Mattias Lundqvist, his name was Nilsson. Yes it was. That was his father's. Well the way they took their names, you know, I guess his father's name was Nils Olsson and so his name became Mattias Nilsson. Then when he went through with his apprenticeship as a smith or a blacksmith, he changed his name to Lundqvist and that's the name we've had all through the years. So we have relatives here whose names are Nilsson and it always has been a question mark in their mind why we haven't the same name and we've tried to explain it to them as to how it happened. So what kind of work was he doing then in Olive? He was, well as far as I have heard, he was working in a factory in Olive which was called Vagnfabriken and he was working as a smith. That's as much information as I can give you. So what was the reason that they left Sweden, do you think, was there a relation over here? Yes, my father had two brothers, one right in the city of Rockford and one outside of Rockford on a farm. So we came to Rockford from Sweden, directly to Rockford and never moved out of Rockford as far as that's concerned as a family home. Did they send the tickets to your family? No, my father and mother had paid their own way and after we had been here six months, my father became very, very ill and I can still remember how upset the whole household was and after I have talked to my father, he got over this illness but it was a very narrow squeeze there. I asked my mother, what would you have done if anything had happened to dad after you had been here six months? She said, we had put aside enough money so I had a chance to get back to Sweden again. Now that's being foresighted, isn't it? So they had savings then? Yeah. It was actually planned in the right way in case of emergency? Yeah. I don't know how it was saved, I don't know anything about that but I do know that's the answer I got from her. But luckily, my dad recovered. Do you remember anything of taking the trunks in Sweden? Nothing at all. Because you were five then at that point? Yeah, I was five after we got over here. No, I don't remember that at all but I have heard speak of an auction and I have always admired that my mother could think ahead at that time to take the things along that she did. How did she know? She had a sister who was a dressmaker who I understand came in and did some sewing so that we had clothes to come in but when we came over here, it was one of the hottest summers they'd had in a long time and she said my worry was how I was going to get clothes cool enough for us to wear because she was prepared for a Swedish summer which is entirely different from the kind we had in Rockford at that time. We lived in an upstairs apartment. Four rooms with the Swedish family living downstairs. They had three children and we lived in these four rooms, my mother and dad and my sister and myself and had a very nice relationship because my mother and this lady downstairs could talk Swedish. But I realize as you grow older that my mother was housebound, didn't get out very much. She had this six-month-old baby and a four-year-old child to take care of. My dad found a job, got out into the circulation that was going on and I realize how difficult it must have been for my mother. She had left all her people in Sweden. She had nobody over here. So we can't admire her enough for what she did. So when you left Sweden, if we go back a little bit, do you remember anything about the traveling, the voyage? All I can remember are some experiences on the boat. On Helig Ulof. What? On Helig Ulof. Uh-huh. And it's a very childish thing, but you see, it so happened that in making the arrangements, my dad had arrangements for my mother and my sister and myself in one cabin and he had a berth in a cabin across the hall there where some bachelors from Sweden who were traveling to America. Who they are, I don't know. But in the meantime, when they found out how high that upper berth was and there was no protection for me to sleep up there, they decided that it was too great a risk. So dad moved into this berth and slept with, so I had protection from him from not falling off. And my mother and my sister had the lower berth. But in the meantime, we had access to the cabin across the hall. And for some reason or other, I can't tell you what, maybe they were playing cards or something, the fellows, but they put me in the upper berth right by the porthole. And that was fascinating to me. But I'd gotten a hold of a pencil and all the woodwork around that porthole was white. And a pencil in a white place. What else would a child do but make use of it? So I scribbled all over there before they caught me. But I was reprimanded for it, and I remember it. That was an experience that I have. So you started out as an artist on the floor? No, no, but I've always used a pencil all my life. No. Well, that was an experience, and I don't know what else. Do you remember the evening arrangements on the boat? Did you go to a big dinner? That is not clear in my mind, no. Evidently that wasn't, because I know my mother had, I don't know, she had some things with her, because my mother had a problem of not being able to eat everything. And evidently she had some food along. I don't know what it was. I don't know how it was used. My main question to my mother afterward is having a six-month-old baby. How did you take care of all the needs of a baby in a cabin? And she said that was the easiest part of the trip, because she had a basin and water available. In the cabin? And then she said another thing was, well, I said, what did you do? You didn't have disposal diapers or anything. She said, I had a whole suitcase, and we had that suitcase here for many years, loaded with cloth and rags that she had prepared, that she used, and she said, I just shoved it in the ocean through the portal. But foresightedness again. But she had to because there was no other way of doing things in those days. Then when it comes on the train, she said that was the hardest part of the trip, because we went from New York to Rockford on the train. Maybe we went off in Chicago. That I don't know. But we landed in Rockford here down at the old CB&Q station. She said that trip was endless because it was hot, no water, and taking care of a baby was difficult. There was no hot water or anything? No water. No water at all? No water at all, she said. So I don't know. I don't know. But before entering the train, you had to go through Ellis Island. Yes, we did. Do you remember anything? One experience, because I was told very definitely that I must hang on to my father's coattail. I did. And when he had to go through I don't know where, it seemed to me like a long line, I was standing beside him hanging on, evidently. Then he came to a place where they examined his eyes. And the thing I can remember is I was horrified when they took and turned his eye to examine it, and I had never seen anything like that. And I can still see how they did to my dad then. Evidently it wasn't anything that hurt him, but it was something terrible for me to see. That's the only thing I can remember about Ellis Island. So they didn't examine you or anything in the eyes? Not at all that I can remember. I don't know. Mother never said anything about that. But Dad went through this line, and as long as I had to hang on to his coattail, I was there. So you were a girl now. You didn't have to go with your mother in her line for examinations? Not that I know. Not that I know. And I can't remember anybody looking me over at all. It's just this thing about the eye. And your parents didn't say anything else? No. No. They talked very little about it. You were the only two children at the time? There was no boys? No. No boys at all. And then the train trip, of course, there was a long bad one. Yeah, but I... You had to get food, I suppose. That doesn't mean much to me. I can't remember the train trip particularly, excepting that... I guess I don't know if we'd walked up... I can't remember exactly. But I know I came back to the seat, and in the seat was a box. And in that box was candy. Boy, did that look good to me. So, after a while, they came and wanted money for it. They had just put it in the... and we were stupid enough to take it, so we had to pay for it. That's what I heard afterward. Of course, I didn't know the process at the time. There was only candy? There was no food? Only candy. As far as I can remember. That was what struck my eye, of course. Did it taste good then? Was it good tasting? Well, you know how a child likes candy. It doesn't have to be too good, but it is good to a child. So, there was a temptation? Absolutely. Absolutely. Yes. Then when we came to Rockford, my uncles didn't know just what station we were coming to. So, they had ordered, in that day, they called it a hack, to wait at the station when one train was coming in, and had left a note with this man to give to my father if he thought it looked like it might be him, you know. And that was from my uncle who lived up here on South 4th Street. And so, I can remember riding a hack along the street and having to ride backwards. I guess you and mom must have ridden the other way and then Pom said, we rode backwards. And there was a bad feeling? You didn't like that at all? I don't know whether I didn't like it or not, but that's the thing I can remember, that I rode backwards. Why? I don't know. And that was your place of living for a short time? Just for a very short, I don't know. Was it arranged beforehand? Yes, yes, they had arranged. So, we were there, I would say, I don't know, if I say a week, because then we spent a week out with my uncle on a farm, they tell me. And in the meantime, they had found this place, this apartment that we moved into. So, we moved into there right away. And your daddy got a job then? What was his first job, Esther? I don't remember. Yes, he did. I know he had a job. Do you remember, you spoke only Swedish then, after you started school, of course. Sure. And the neighbor was Swedish also. Well, and the kind of English you could pick up on the street, you know. No, I had no idea of English excepting. So, when I started school, I started out from the very beginning. And the teacher, was she or he a Swedish person? No, no, no, there was no special help at all. The teacher's name was Mrs. Karkov. I remember her, very kind, but I can also, I can understand now, the problem she must have had with a child in her class. And I don't know if I was the only one, I don't know that, but a child who comes and doesn't speak English, that's quite a problem. And there was no extra help in those days. How did you pick up the language then? Do you remember anything you had? My reader, my primer, and I brought it home, and my mother and father learned along with me, until my mother was a better speller than I was. But how about the pronunciation? You were the one that guided them with pronunciation? I imagine, I imagine that's where they got it, yes. Because there was no radio or TV or anything that... Oh, no, no, there was no preparation that way. And furthermore, the people with whom we lived were Swedish. All the neighbors were Swedish, so there was no way my mother could pick up English, being housebound the way she was. Even the grocery boy who came and took the order was Swedish. So she didn't have to go to the store then? She could, but she didn't have to. He came to the store once a week? I think it was once a week. He came on a bicycle and took the order. And then he came the next day with a horse and buggy and delivered it. And one of our best memories is every time he delivered, there was a striped bag of candy for us with a cigar for my dad. And that was... That was given. That was a little token from the grocer. I see. It was a very, very, very friendly relationship. But the candy was there also for your mother then, because your father got the cigar and... Well, yes, but you know how that is. I imagine we took over on the candy. I don't know about you, but I know I did to begin with. So you had to be careful. You couldn't eat it all at the same time. You spaced it out so less... Oh, I'm sure Ma dished it out. She wasn't a candy eater in the first place. That was just a simple thing, but it's a thing that we remember. And it kept on for some time because Esther remembers it too. She got old enough then to get into the... Oh, yes. Candy bag too. You bet. You bet. And what neighborhood were you living in then? Close to downtown? No. It was South 3rd Street. South 3rd Street. And the people from whom we rented was the name of Adamson. And they became perhaps our closest friends for all the years, but that whole family has died. There were three children and the mother and father. So there's nobody left of that family excepting one, the youngest boy's wife, and they have a daughter who is, by the way, residing in Sweden now. She lives in Stockholm, is married to a Swedish fellow and works there. And the conveniences now, do you remember if your mother said it was harder to live in Sweden to be a housewife compared to Rockford, for instance? You didn't have any ice boxes at that time. Not to begin with. No washing machine. Oh, no. And no inside plumbing. Yes, we did. We had bathroom in the upstairs. There was a hall and then a closed closet and then this extra room, and there was the community bathroom for the people downstairs and us. But it was right so that it was very handy for us. Very nice. This was 1910. That was 1910. So it was quite a modern house then. I wouldn't call it a modern house. I mean with the inside plumbing. Well, that was considered. We were very happy with that. How about the toilet facilities? Were they out in the inside too? No, no, no. No, that was all. The whole plumbing was in there. Yeah. So it was much easier to have the baby then to care for it. That's right. Instead of going out in the nighttime. Yeah. It's very. No. The place we came to, my uncle, they didn't have inside plumbing at that time. They had a long walk down to the end of the yard, you know, where the little outhouse was. It was very common in those days. Did some of the houses have a chicken coop behind the actual house? Not where we lived, but there was over on South 4th Street. Yes, they had chicken coops. I can't exactly remember too much about that, but I'm sure. I know there were because I've talked about it later. So your parents, they had to buy the eggs and the milk and everything from the farming community. I can't answer to. I know that once in a while my uncle from the farm would come in. I know we had potatoes from him. He was a farm brewer, in other words a brother to you. Farm brewer, yeah. And where did he live then? In Stilman Valley? No, on Linden Road today. It's the only farmhouse left now. It is all suburb. So there he had a farm then, and he had all his time he was here. He came to that farm and he stayed there? No, well, we just were there for... we came to the home... But your uncle, he stayed there all his life? Yes, yes. And he was married also? Yes. What was his name? Nelson. Ola Nelson. So you congregated quite a bit then with your uncle, I suppose, and his family. Was it too far to go out there? In those days it was a big event when we got ready to go out to my uncle's farm because we either had to take the interurban out of Rockford out to Malford's Crossing or we took the milk train in the morning that went out to Perryville. Then he would meet us at either place in his wagon, and in the winter it would be a sleigh. So that trip had to be planned then? Oh... You just couldn't hop on the train? Oh, no, no, no. So everything was planned in those days, they knew exactly when you were coming? Yeah, oh yes. Did you stay overnight then if it was... No, no. You went back the same day? The same day. I can never remember saying, Kat, did we yesterday? I never did. That you remember. How about the church now? Did they join any church or parents when they came here? No, they never affiliated with any church. How about any organization of the Swedish-American background? I would say there was... Dad wasn't a joiner of all these organizations, although... there was a group that was the... they called themselves, I guess, the Workers' Club. And they hung together a group of fellas, young men who came over and family men. We had some very good times together. So there was a sizeable group that came in 1910 because there was a big strike in Sweden in 1909. Stor... Storstrike. I thought that was... what was 1905 then? No, that was the union with Norway broke. They had a union with Norway in Sweden and then broke in 1905. Yeah, I know they've talked about Storstrike. So maybe your dad had something... Might be, might be. And there was quite a few workers then that came from Sweden and settled in Rockford. So they met in their homes or did they have a meeting hall? Well, I would say 7th Street, there were usually... 7th Street seemed to be the gathering place for the Swedes. And going to 7th Street on Saturday night was like meeting all your friends. And you'd go into the stores and buy some little things you know. They had a couple of movies there. I remember once in a while dad would take me in to the movie house because Esther, my mother, stayed home again you see. And we'd usually go out and buy... For instance, we went to buy a little doll buggy for Esther once and I can remember so well what it looked like. And when we got that, dad took me to a movie. See, that was... An American movie? Yeah, American movie. There was playing the piano and all that. Yeah, that's right, that's right. So you were actually the teacher in the Lundqvist family to bring home the English words and new ones because you gained knowledge every day. Yeah, that might be, but we spoke Swedish a great deal at home. We spoke Swedish for many years. But how about when your sister Esther started to get old enough? Did you speak in Swedish to her then? At that time? Yeah, when she was five or six or seven. I don't think so. I can't remember. How do you remember what you do? I know, that's impossible to do, but I just asked the question if you remember if you learned English. I imagine there were times. Yeah, I imagine the English became a part, such a gradual part of everything that you weren't even aware. When it happened. How about your playmates now? Because you brought home some girlfriends, and they talked to her, for instance. Yeah, well, that might be, but we were more or less restricted in how we went in the neighborhood. We kept a very close schedule on being home on time and coming directly home from school. And then there were three children in the same house, and we had a lot of fun together. Oh. Yeah. So you played in the... And then, oh yeah, there were times when the whole neighborhood would gather under the light on the corner, and we'd play games, all kinds of silly little games, but fun. We had a lot of fun, I can remember that. And we could play baseball right out in the street in those days. No traffic to bother us, and we had a lot of fun doing that. And most of the kids were of Swedish parents in that whole section there. So you could feel a unity of... Yeah, I imagine....cooperation and then they adhered to each other. Yeah. The only thing, I think we were the real green Swedes in the neighborhood. Yeah, but they were coming all the time though, between 1910 and 1911. Yeah, but not right in that neighborhood. I think in that neighborhood it was more or less settled, you know. It was a stable neighborhood. Because the people with whom we rented had bought that house already. That was their property. Now that was quite a deal. They must have been here some time before in order to do that. Because I don't know anything of the history of that. So this group now your dad belonged to with the workers group there, did they meet in the halls? No, they had a hall. They had a hall. Yeah. Did you go there too then? Oh, sure, when there were family gatherings. But that was as we got a little older. I would say after Esther got to be, don't you say seven, eight years old? I would say that. That was during the war then. First World War. 1917, 16, 17. Yeah. I can't remember exactly. You don't remember. They had a scuffle here, you know, a lot of people didn't want to go to the war during the 1917, 18, I think. No, 17. Yeah. You don't remember anything about those things that happened? Yes. Yes, there was quite an upheaval then, quite an upheaval. I think Hallstrom was... Yes, yes, we know Hallstrom. He was not the mayor at that time, though, 1917. Oh, no, oh, no. He was a young guy then. He was young, came just from Sweden, I guess. He probably came at the same time as you did in 1910. That I can't say. That I don't know anything about. But you knew him personally. Oh, yes. I know his children. In fact, his daughter and son live in San Antonio, Texas. And I just had a telephone conversation with them the other day, and the daughter had quite a sad experience. She had a stroke and is blind. I see. But we're not that close friends, but we keep in touch. You probably went to school with... No, no, no. Were they much older or... No, they're younger. But we went to a school, always a community school, you know, where all these Swedish kids around in the neighborhood went to this school. And it's Kishwaukee School. And I went all the way through the eighth grades there. I have some very nice memories of that school. And by the way, the principal of that school was Swedish. I don't know if she spoke Swedish. Did you ever hear Esther? No. So, Halström, he was one of the... He was in that group. In that group, yeah. You don't remember what happened there yet? Well, I don't know exactly. You hear, you heard stories, and I'd rather not. Because some had to go to Chicago, I understand. They were in prison, some of the guys. Yeah, in Brideville. Yeah, Brideville. What is that located in Chicago? Is it right in Chicago, or is it just a name of it? I don't know. The Brideville is in... I don't know. Me neither. They came back though, and the war was over, but they finally were released. They were sitting there for a few months. They were there, I think, a year. I don't know. I'd say a year anyway. Yeah, some of them were released. And the side two. So, but this group, they was active. They had David Killeen, I talked to him ten, fifteen years ago, I believe. And he was very active. He was first a Baptist Sunday school teacher, and then he went over to the... He's still around, but I don't know. He is failing now, I understand. What? He is failing a little bit now. That's what I understand. So you remember him though? Oh, yes. He told me that there was a school for Swedish children that this club had. They had to go to like a Sunday school or something. Oh, yeah, instead of a Sunday school. Do you remember that? Yes, yes, I remember that. But it had nothing to do with the church though? No. Oh, no, no, no. What kind of subjects was he... He was a teacher, I understand. Killeen? Yeah. No, he wasn't a teacher when I was there. But the things that we learned there, we would... It would be literature, like all of Jack London's books, and ideas that made a man like Jack London write the way he did. You might say... Oh, and we learned historical books like the early caveman and the trend of civilization. That we studied. Not studied, but we read it and talked about it, and we always had a good time afterward, always had a little treat of some kind, you know. Who was the teacher then? Because he got to have some education or what? Well, I know that the one that was the best-remembered teacher to us would be Jalmer Fricksell. Jalmer Fricksell. And he was very interested in giving plays and directing us in doing things of this type. And so we would have performances for our parents and give plays. Sometimes he'd write them, sometimes he'd find something that would be fitting for us. But they were always... They were not tinsel things. They had a little meat to them. So there was a meaning with it. Yes, you were thinking while you were doing this. He was very good. He was very good with children. How many were you then? You remember? You both went to the school? We have friends from that group still. We art together time and time again. I can't say. I'd say at least 50. I imagine at our peak we made... You met every Sunday then? Sunday morning. And that was conducted in Swedish or English? English. Oh, English. Never in Swedish? Not that I know of. Oh, I see. We were 50 on the stage. Yeah. So this shows to me that this group was further ahead than the other Swedish groups because they kept the Swedish and kept a lot of young people away from their doings. We never felt that that was the idea. The idea of our going there was to give us a little extra knowledge. And it was not to be... They were not for religious knowledge. I can't remember ever having any religious instruction, but social things and things that you weren't aware of sometimes unless it was pointed out to you. I think most of us have formed our lifestyle because of that foundation. So they gave you an insight of more than the regular things you read in the newspapers. That's right. I feel that way. Did you have a newsletter that was sent out? No, no, no. Nothing like that. So it was not strong enough then to... No, no. It was just to fill a need, I have an idea, because many of these people who came over from Sweden were more or less... had been tied to the state church, and I don't feel that they were particularly anxious to continue that path. And I imagine most of them, just as long as they had free reign, decided to be thinking the way they felt they should think rather than by dictation from a pulpit. You could think for yourself. Yeah, I think so. At least that's the way we have always been taught. How did they work out in the workplace? Were they looked upon as rebels, you think? Like your parents and their friends, of starting something new, different from the church and different from Vasa and Viking and Switzerland? Well, we didn't advertise. You didn't do much advertising. How did you get your membership, though? By word of mouth? Just from groups of people who came and had the same needs. And we have these same families still today. So you kept the bond of friendship? Oh, it's a friendship that you can't break. It really is. I don't know. Some of our closest friends are the kids that we were together at that time. We were separated in living because our parents lived in maybe different quarters of the city. But on Sunday morning, we got together, and it was just a grand time for us. First, an hour when we all sat down and listened and had a little instruction and could ask questions. You were able to ask questions? Oh, sure, sure. If there was anything that you particularly wanted to. Were you eager to go to those meetings? Yeah, because of our friends. Oh, yes. We didn't like to miss a Sunday morning. And there was always a little treat afterward. And we could get together and play games in this hall where we met. Nothing was forced on us. No, no. And all the people didn't meet on Sunday then? No, no. Only them? No. Did you walk by yourself then? Sure, sure. And it was on 7th Street? Uh-huh, uh-huh. In the meeting hall. Is that house still there? The meeting hall? Yeah. One of them is. One of them is. One of them was on the corner of 6th Avenue and 7th Street. It was on the third floor. It's a red brick building. It's still there. We met up there. And then there was another hall, but I don't know exactly where, because I think maybe it was torn down when the bank bought that whole block. I don't know for sure. You know, you lose track of those things. And then Herman Halstrom, he was elected mayor in 1930s, wasn't it? That I can't remember. Wasn't he elected on what they call the socialist ticket? Yes. No. I don't know if it was a socialist ticket or it was some independent... But they were for him, though. I mean, he got the... Oh, yes. Yes. That's what I understand. Yes. Uh-huh. But I also understand that he disassociated himself with that group when he gets more in the saddle. I think that's a sore point with the... Human race that we get about... Yes. I think it was a disappointment to the settled older family men, because at the time when he was doing this, I don't think he was even married. And then when he sort of... Evidently something happened. I don't know what. But I know there was disillusionment among a lot of them as to whatever he did. But he went on and became mayor again and again. So evidently he had backers from some other angle. What was he as a mayor? I mean, you got old enough to understand what he was doing. Was he a forceful man or how did he get to this mayorship? I don't know. I really can't... Because he must have been elected by more than Swedes though, because there wouldn't be... Oh, sure. But I can't intelligently answer that, because when you come to the inside of politics... It's hard to understand what's going on. No. I'd rather... I don't want to get involved in that, because I don't know. I know there was disillusionment. Let's put it that way. But these friends of yours and your parents, they stuck with the conviction of educating you people, of making you aware of what's happening and so on. Oh, yes. Oh, yes. They didn't sway away from that. Oh, no. No, they kept... They were very well read. And they also had their own newspapers. Svenska Socialisten. Yes. Yes. I know that was one. That was a paper that was... And Ny Tid. Ny Tid. Yes. How was that distributed now in Rockford? Door to door or by the mail? How did they receive it? Do you remember that? Gosh. Do you remember if it came with the mailman? Gosh, I wish I would remember. I think it came by mail. I can't... Did you read that paper then? Were you able to read the Swedish? Oh, yes. I could read it, sure. And you too? Not very much. Oh, she does too. She does real well. But I didn't read those papers then. Oh, no. Not at that age, you don't. No, you were not interested in them, of course. No, no. It's a different... What? But that... Apparently, they had the cost to be a little bit aggravated with the situation what happened in the 1930s with the stock market and crash and the workers' problems and everything. And what do you think made the workers disappear from this group for a while? Because after the Second World War, there was nothing left. It died down in 1938, 39. Do you suppose... Was it a time? The times. And having gone through the depression and trying to get going again, I don't know exactly what to say, excepting that sometimes maturity takes over. You can see some very young, active people, follow them until they reach 30s and 40s, and they level off, don't they? And the maturity takes over, and this drive and eagerness they have, which made them take the move from Sweden, coming over to an unknown land, not knowing the language or anything. And after they once got settled, that eagerness kind of dips a little bit, and then all of a sudden maturity takes over. It happens to all of us. So you resign or you retire at all? Well, yes, maybe that's true. Maybe they don't have the means to go on, because if you're going to go on thinking that way, it also means that... It costs money to support. Yes, and you have to give up a lot, and the families have to give up a lot for it. And maybe it comes to the station in life where that feeling of I've got to make it a little more settled for my family takes place. I don't know. Now, you see, I'm talking from a disadvantage, because I really don't know what goes on. You can tell what happens to yourself as you get older, but you do it under different circumstances. So do you remember if any people from Chicago visited here, like Henry Bengston? Do you know that name? I don't know. He belonged to... He was one of the editors. I don't remember him. So there was local people that in Rockford that had this group. So there are ideas. Harry Anderson is another one. Do you remember him? Yes, I remember Harry Anderson. But he was more rebellious, though. He was more like a communist, though. He was very fluent in speaking. Yes, he was. Yes, he was a friend of my father's, and he would come. We knew his first family. In fact, I knew his second wife, too. He just died a few... not very long ago. But he was well-read and well-adversed. Exactly. But he was a little bit... he went overboard, perhaps. Were you afraid to follow him? I don't know. I really can't say. I know that... I'm a little bit eager. Eager, yes. And you know, that was sin, too. You have that for years, and then all of a sudden, I don't know what takes place in a human being, but that zip starts to go down a little. But as far as I know, he always kept his thinking along lines of making it better for the average working man. But I really didn't see Harry after my dad died. Well, before my dad died, because dad didn't see him for many years. When did your father die? In 1963. Oh, I see. So he saw then the upcoming of the unions and the workers betterment of themselves. Yes, yes. Was he able to get the fruits of what the union started with? The hotel, for instance. Able to get what? Get the fruits of what? Because like your father's group now, or the one there, they were actually asking for better working conditions. Yes, that's exactly it. And it came along, but it took many years before it actually... Well, I can remember one strike. That's the only one I can remember, though, that he was in. What? Machinist, I think it was at the time. Of course, my dad would be the kind that if he set out to stay out, he stayed out to the last man. Finally, they started going back in, everybody, and Pa was walking the street alone up there on 7th Street. So he was really... When he had something that he believed in, he wouldn't change. He was very, very determined in that way. I imagine maybe that's why he wasn't here. I imagine that's maybe what happened. I don't know what happened in Sweden. But I don't think there was any more honorable man than my father. Was there hardship on you now as a family? Did you agree with him then, or did you... Well... Like your mother, because you were old enough then to... Oh, well, it was difficult, I'm sure. Not so much on us, but I'm sure it was difficult for my mother. I'm sure it was. It would be any time. Yeah, it wasn't easy, I'm sure, for her. But you never heard her complain. No. Never, never. So there was a group of dedicated people to believe in the idealistic solution. Yeah. But there were not many enough then. No, I imagine that. They were afraid. And I don't know whether it really was organized strongly enough, because I had a feeling that my dad felt that it was the wrong time, because the organization was weak, and he proved to be right. And then the Depression time made people hungry, so they had to work, regardless of wages. I know. It was just against the wall. Yeah, yeah, it is. And it was when Hallstrom took his shoes off and towed away to the other street. I'd rather have you discuss that with people who know, because I don't want to get into that. But I again repeat, yes, it was a period of great disillusionment for many. But he stayed in Rockford or Hallstrom until he died. Yes, yes, he did. Yeah, the children moved down there afterward. Do you remember during the Depression, how did your family fare during the Depression? It was a hard time for many. They lost houses. At that time, I think my dad had gone through quite a chore of finding out that – I don't know whether he – I can't say exactly what happened, but he finally got a work at a small factory where he stayed the rest of his life and really had a nice relationship, I understand, because he became foreman of the department where they had the big heavy hammers, you know. And he seemed to be happy working there. But again, he was more of a mature man and he had family responsibilities. And sometimes in that way, a man evidently realizes that something has to give a little bit. He never gave on what he felt or believed in, but he knew that he could change everything. So that he found this place and he had a wonderful experience there. And his family, his last years were very happy. He worked until he was 75. Did he go back to Sweden at that time, your mother? Dad never went back. But my mother – I went back with my mother in 1934. Very nice experience. Did he have a fight with depression? Well, it was a matter of – Were you able then to save him? He was in a teaching school and I had a little so that I could take care of myself. He felt that my mother had always wanted to go back. It was then or never. And I asked him if he didn't want to go, not now. So my mother and I went. But after he retired, he decided all of a sudden – he came home and he said, if I'm going to get to Sweden, I'm going this summer. Well, he was 78 or 79 at the time. And again, both my sister and I felt, I don't want Pa to go alone. So I went with him. She had her family and I went with him. We had a marvelous time in Sweden. He was highly respected by all the people I came in contact with there. And the family and the people who knew him from way back when he first came, I could sense the respect that he had. So there was something that I didn't know before that evidently existed. And I think anybody you talk to here who knew my father will give you the same feeling. Yeah. He had a good – he was interested in politics, of course. Never actively. In the political arena. No, no. But always following it. I can remember things that he would tell me that at the time I had no concept of because of reading just the literature that I had. But he evidently could see through this, and he would tell me, this you'll see will happen. And it has happened. It has happened. So I think he had a keen insight. So actually he was one of the beginners to high wages and good conditions for the workers in Rockford. Well, but the factory in which he worked in towards the last was a small place. It grew as the years went by and is known now as Stampings and Forgings in Rockford. I don't think it was ever unionized, but it had evidently kind of control that the people stayed on and worked. I don't know the conditions there. Dad never once mentioned that he was foreman to us. We found out from other people about that. So he didn't belong to a union then? No, not then. No, there wasn't any union. I don't know. I don't know if there's one now. So that was a bad word, I understand, in Rockford circles among the management. What? When they talked about unions, the management... Oh, yeah. It still is a problem. It's still a problem. How about the churches now? Were they in opposition to the workers sometimes? Do you think they handled the questions more with the management? I have no idea. I have no idea because I had no church connections. Oh, and your dad didn't... No. No discussions about that? Oh, no. No. No. But here you have now Colleen. He was a churchman to start with and he had some... Yeah, yes. He's a different type of a person. Yeah, he is. He's a salesman perhaps more than... Well, he again had a very... He was very able to speak. He could speak. He could hold an audience for a while, you know. And he had a very keen sense of humor, which went over big with people, yeah. And to this day when we see him, he's... We enjoy seeing him. I don't enjoy seeing what I am seeing in him now because of the deterioration of age. And that's a hard thing to take, especially when you're on the path yourself. And your home was a Swedish custom all the way. Oh, yes. And your parents, they practiced that for Christmas and all the holidays. Oh, yes, we had all. Christmas especially. What happened then? How soon did you get the Christmas tree in for decoration? Long before Christmas or... Not to begin with. Not to begin with. But now you go with the times. If you're going to get a Christmas tree now, you have to get it early. And it's a tree that's been cut a long, long time. And Christmas trees change. There is a concept that the Swedes have of a Christmas tree, which I can see even in the pictures is more or less of a fir tree that you can see through. And the Christmas tree that we particularly like is more of a full tree. And we laugh at it now. But buying a Christmas tree can be quite a trial for a family, even today, because there are different ideas of what you want. And words can be quite harsh when it comes to deciding which tree is the best. Were you a young girl then? Your dad picked out the Christmas tree? Mostly, mostly. And he came home with it? Yeah, yeah. And who dressed it? We did with what we had. We had very little to start with. But you see, in those days, you could keep a Christmas tree. I can remember we even had candles in our tree. Live candles? Yeah. But we had to be very careful, of course, and we were watched when we had them lit. But I also can remember that we had no central heat, and we had a stove heat in the one room, and then we'd shut off the one room, and that's where we kept the Christmas tree, so it was cool for it. And it could keep a long time. And then we had the time when we plundered a groan, you know? And we could do that. So that room was used only when you had a party then or a gathering? In wintertime. In wintertime it was never used? Well, we didn't have many people coming in those days, you know. So they could stand it a long time there? It could stand until, what is it, sugar and dog snooze or something like that. So you had a Christmas party for your friends? Not in those early days, no. In those early days we didn't. You don't remember any Christmas parties on the club either? Yes, many of them. Many of them. Always having a Christmas tree. The whole family? Yeah, the whole family get around and we dance around the Christmas tree, New Julien, you know. Oh, yeah. And Jodlappar? When we were growing up, when we first came over, that was very scarce. Very scarce. We had to live very frugally. And Tomten? Well, we, yeah. He came and usually the window was opened up a little bit. Or once, I can remember one Christmas when we spent Christmas out at my uncle's on the farm. And when we came home, on the stove in the kitchen, which was a cook stove with stove pipes that came up and around, you know, and had to go out to the flue. Then we came home and, my gosh, hanging over that stove pipe were two stockings filled with candy and an orange and, of course, Tomten or water. And when we grew up, we found out that the people downstairs had the key to the house when we were gone to keep the stove going and they had hung the stockings there when we were gone. But they were used to Tomten. So that way the stockings came into your Christmas too then? Yeah, yeah. They started to get used. Did you change anything over the years now with Christmas holidays? We still have a Christmas stocking and now my sister has knitted and made stockings for her three children and for her grandchildren. And when they come here, we hang them on the fireplace. And then in the morning, those who stay here overnight find some little things in their stockings. How about the Christmas tree? Are you looking for the full-grown tree? Yes, yeah. Not the one you can look through? No, no. We like it. Who gave you the idea? The looks of it. It appeals more to you? Yeah. And then, of course, now we don't have to have the candles. Now we have the electric lights and then it doesn't make that much difference. If there is, when you had to have a candle, you had to have space.