 I had in Mexico, he came over when he was a very young man. He came over I think about in the, oh I imagine it must have been the early 1890s. And he was from Erland, Boerholm, Erland. And he was graduated, he went to school in Kalmar. And then his uncle, his paternal uncle, was in, had interest in a silver mine in Mexico. It was called, it was the State of Drongo. And he had an interest. Well anyway, he was visiting in Sweden at one time in the early 1890s. And I guess my father decided that he wanted to go out too to see if he could make some money. So he went with him to Mexico. And there he became enamored with the Mexican ways of living and everything. And then he met my mother to be. And so I was born in Mexico. Then about, in, oh I imagine it must have been about 1904 or 5, there were no schools there. So my father decided to send me up to his sister who was Mrs. Edquist, because they had no children. And so I was, I was, I was adopted by my uncle and aunt in Omaha. So that's how, in Mexico. And of course they're both gone now. We have today the 30th of September 1987 and I'm sitting together with Emilia Edquist, Omaha, Nebraska. So you were sent then to the United States. Your father and your parents, they, your parents, they, yeah, they, they, well then after a while my father and my mother, my own, my own father, my own mother were divorced, separated. So there was nothing for my sister and myself to, to live in Mexico because of course at that time we were just little children, you know. So we were both sent up here to the United States to be, and we were adopted by Mr. and Mrs. Per August Edquist. So how long had he been here in Omaha then from Sweden, about the same time as your father? Oh I have been here, well I think, your uncle, how long? My, my uncle came, P.A. Edquist came over in, let's see what I got something here. That's, that's his story there. Oh I see he was born 1862 in the in Östergötland. Yes. In Östergötland, Omaha. I don't know if you can read my writing. Yes. Then he died in 1926 in Omaha. Mm-hmm, that's right. And they didn't have any children then? No, they had no children. You were adopted by them. We were adopted by them, my sister and myself were adopted. Then when my sister was through school and she was, she was working and, and came and was living in Omaha and she met Martin, maybe you know Nils Martin Swearee. No, I never heard of him. He was in Chicago. No, he was in Chicago. No, he was in Omaha. But he had, he came over about 1923 from Sweden. He was born in Skåne in Östergötland, Östergötland, Skåne. And he came over 1923 I believe. And he was employed here by a big company and then he, but he passed away in 1974. But anyway, he married my sister. So of course he was very, he was Swedish you know and, and but he, he was a very good businessman and, and he was very popular here among the Swedish colony. So now, how did you, so this Edqvist now, P.A. Edqvist, was he your farbrother or morebrother? Well he would be, he would be my, my farbrother. But your father's name was Wallander. Wallander. Why was it different? Well, because after all my, my mother, my adopted mother would be faster, you see. She was a fast, hunvarman faster. And then of course she would, her husband was my farbrother. Oh, Edqvist, oh I see. Yes. He was your foster uncle. And so did you keep in contact then when you get a little bit older with your father-in-law? Oh yes, oh yes. You went down there for visits? Well I went down there a couple times and he came, he used to come up here every once in a while to visit us. And what kind of work was he doing then? Well he was in the silver, in the silver mines. He continued with that? And he was successful with it? Well yes, I guess he was. And so of course after a while, well you know how it goes, you just can't keep up with everybody and you, you sort of change. And I went, I was, I was sent to Montreal, Canada for, to be with the Swedish consulate. So of course I had no, no connections with Mexico at all. Did he die down there? Yes, he died there. And he never remarried then? No, well he remarried, yes he remarried. Uh-huh. So here in Omaha then you were raised by the Edqvist. And you went to school here and did you also join the church of Edqvist? Oh yes, I joined the, I was confirmed in the Swedish Augustana church. Salem or Emmanuel? I was Augustana, well at that time it was called the Zion Lutheran church, Zion Lutheran. And I was confirmed in Swedish. I had to learn the whole, I had to chase the whole thing by heart. Did your husband or her husband, did they talk Swedish in the family? We always talked, no, no we didn't talk very much Swedish. No? So when I had, when I went to work for the Swedish consulate, of course it was quite difficult for me because I had to, I had to learn all over again. But in the meantime I'd been over in Sweden and visited there for a long time, for several months. With your relation? With my relatives, uh-huh. Both your fathers and, well only your father. I was, I was with my, my relatives in Öland and also in Östergötland. And then I had relatives in Blekinge, Rønneby. And so I visited with all of them. And I stayed there for about six months and there's where I picked up my Swedish. Oh I see. So your father sent you over then for a visit or did you do that on your own, Nicole? Oh I went on my own. So and your sister, now did she stay also with you, you grew up together? Yes we grew up together and but she didn't, she didn't get over to Sweden until after she was married. And so she and her husband, Martin Swearee, went over in 1953 to Sweden and they visited over there for about six months. They visited in Ystad and then Öland and all over. And so she learned a great deal about Sweden that time. So your father and mother and inquisitor, did they keep the Swedish customs with the food? Oh yes, oh yes. We had the Swedish food and limpa at Christmas time. And Swedish Christmas and doppelgrutan. The whole thing. Were they active church members? Oh yes, they were active church members. Ladies Aid and Syfri. Yes and all that. And in fact my adopted father, P.A. Edquist, he became Swedish consul in Omaha. He was very, in 1915 he was made Swedish vice consul in Omaha. What kind of work was he doing? He was, he had graduated from Tekniska Skolan in, oh I have it there, Stockholm, no, Norrköping. Oh, he was well educated. Oh yes, he was an, he was an engineer, civil engineer, like most Swedes that came over were engineers, you know. So he got a pretty good job. Oh yes, he was a county engineer here in Omaha, for the Douglas County and then he went into his own, then he was also at the Union Pacific, you know, building bridges and such. And then the last years of his life, not the last, from 1908 I think it was, he started his own, his own engineering office. So he was on his own then for the last years of his life. And in 1915 he was elected as an honorary consul, Swedish consul. Yes, uh-huh. How long did he... From 1915 until 1926. I see. So there's where you get some of the Swedish consul training. Yes, that's where I got some of the training. So you could start as a secretary for him? Well, I wasn't secretary for him, no, he had his own, he had his office for, for his engineering and then it wasn't too much secretarial work then, you know. And it was mostly to, at that time there were so many Swedish residents in, in, in, in this area, in the Middle West, and they, they were mostly all farmers. Well, if they settled in a farm and then if, say that they, they, they all died, I mean eventually they would die, but they, when there was an estate left and there was no one here to, to get the money, the funds, the funds would be transferred over to Sweden to the heirs over there. So that took all, that took a great deal of his time at that time because there were so many farmers, Swedish farmers here in this area. And Omaha was under the Chicago consulate, that was the consulate general in Chicago, and then Omaha was under that. So it was just a vice consulate, it was an honorary consul. But anyway, he was kept very busy taking care of all these funds, you know, for the people over in Sweden. For instance, if it was not a little old lady, a mother or a grandmother or somebody that was left without, and she probably hadn't heard from her son or grandson for years, and all of a sudden she gets this amount of money and she just doesn't know, she just doesn't know what to do about it. So we used to get the most interesting letters, you know, thanking us for having sent the money over to her. So that was the last pillar. Yes, uh-huh. So I suppose some of them didn't have any children. Well, of course, a lot of these, of course there were some men that were just bachelors, you know, and that they'd worked up their farm and never married, or else if they had married maybe their wife was gone, and so there were no children left. Of course, where there were children left, then there wouldn't be anything to send to Sweden, you know. But that took a great deal of time to get all these funds sent over to Sweden during those years. That was between 1915 and 1926. So you received very good schooling then, because he was eager to... I beg your pardon? Did you receive good schooling then when you lived with them? Well, I guess I... High school and college? Well, I didn't go to college, but I went to high school. And how about business college? Did you go to that? I went to business college. Here in Omaha? Mm-hmm. And then you, your first job then, what was that? Oh, my first job was just an ordinary job, you know, taking dictation and such. But then after that, well, then when I finally gave that up, and I didn't know that I... of course, I couldn't... at that time, when I went into that, that was much later, after my schooling, after I was out of high school. But eventually came into the consular services of Sweden. And you went first to Chicago or Montreal? I went first. Well, they had a small office here in Omaha, and I was here in Omaha for several... for two or three years, and then I was transferred to Montreal, Canada. And how long did you stay there? I was in Montreal for seven years. It was the ambassador's office, though, wasn't it, in Montreal? No, no, it was the consulate general. And the ambassadors, no, they didn't have an ambassador then until later on, during the war years. Then they established a legation in Ottawa. So you were more than a secretary, though, you were like a... Well, I was a little bit of everything, you know. And, of course, in Canada, you know, it's difficult there because everything is so different from the United States. So it's much different. Well, I mean, it's different because it's under England, you know. And the province of Quebec, of course, was French. And so it was a little bit more complicated there. Did you have to learn to speak French, too? Well, I started to. I studied French in high school, but it didn't stay with me very long. You know, when you don't use it, you just don't... Is it true they say that they are very stubborn, Quebeckians? Well, they aren't so much now. Now they have combined themselves with Ottawa, and I think it's much better now. But during the years I was there, it was a very poor country. I mean, there wasn't any business. I mean, they didn't go into business like they do here. Of course, Montreal was their main city. But otherwise, the young men... Hi. Hello. Can I help you with anything? No, they've taken the waste back to the waste. Anyway, the... Oh, I was going to say about the young men in Quebec. Of course, they usually only spoke French, you know, very little English. And when they were out of school, well, there wasn't anything to do except to become priests. They either became priests or some kind of... Something connected with the school, teachers and such. That was the only thing that they went into. So naturally, it wasn't too much of a... the economy wasn't so good. That's what I mean to say. It wasn't so good in Quebec. Don't you think they limited themselves to keeping on to the French? Oh, sure. Sure, they did. But now it's all together different. There's quite an interesting article in Time magazine. I just got it today about Quebec. It's changed so completely. How big of an area did the consulate in Montreal cover in Canada? Well, it covered a lot of things. How big did the consulate in Montreal cover in Canada? Well, it covered all the provinces, really. Because I know we were corresponding with the ones over in Vancouver and also the ones on the East Coast. So it covered a great deal of territory. And what great part did the Swedes play in all of it? Was there a lot of work for the Swedes? Well, there were a lot of Swedes. There were a number of Swedish engineers, of course, in Montreal. And I met some of them. I associated socially with some of their families. So the trade office was combined with your office, too, then? Well, we didn't have a trade office in Montreal. No? No, there wasn't. It was during the war years, you know. And I went up there in 1937. And war came, you know, broke out in 39. And so there wasn't much trade. But of course, we had a great deal to do with the shipping. I mean, the ships coming and going. So I know there were many times when the convoys, you know, from Sweden would come to Montreal. And of course, they would change sailors or sailors would skip ship and so on and so forth. So we had to take care of those. And then you had the regular business of inheritance, like... Yes. Only there wasn't that much money that was transacted between the two countries. So there was a difference in the economy. You could see that. Oh, yes. Oh, yes. Very much so. So the farmers in Canada didn't fare that good? No, I think they had a little more difficulty, difficult times there. And then after the war, you came to the office in Chicago. It was in the late 50s then? No, it was in 44. Oh, 44. And then you stayed on in Chicago? Then I stayed in Chicago until 66. 66? I graduated from there. I retired then. Oh, so then you know the Drake Hotel and the Gold Coast and Lake Chabolo. So I had a good time in Chicago. Where did you live then in Chicago? Where did I live? Yeah. Well, my last apartment was over on Lake Shore Drive. Lake Shore Drive. And the consulate? And the consulate was on 333 North Michigan Avenue. Yeah, 333. On the 21st floor. So we can see... They moved last year. I beg your pardon? They moved last year. I know they did. Have you heard anything about any new consul being a... Yeah, he just came three weeks ago. Who was his name? It isn't... Wilkins, I believe it was. What? Wilkins. Wilkins? Yeah. Yeah, there's something similar. I didn't meet him, but I... Because I know that they weren't too happy with the other one. Oh, I understand that. I know that there was one attorney... Well, he's a honorary consul here in Omaha. Oh, Don Erickson. Erickson. And he'd been over in Chicago and he says they weren't at all happy about this. Oh, there was some fallout or something. I think they've had quite a time since Mr. Oldenburg left. You know, Oldenburg had been there for years. And Jernstedt was all right. He was good. I worked under both of those. Oh, yeah. So Bo Jernstedt. They lived in Drake. Right next door to the Drake. Next door to Drake. They always had that complex there. So then you have been at many different doings in Chicago. Oh, yes. Coffee and breakfasts and lunches. Swedish club. Swedish club. Did you ever go to the Svithjard Club? Yes. That was a nice one. But they all folded up. Yeah, it's not a shame. Why was that, you think? Because they were so strong then when you were in Chicago. Well, it was going... During the years I was there, they were just doing fine. But I just think that the young people, there aren't enough Swedes. You know, the young people aren't interested in Sweden. Could you see that the third and fourth generation, they didn't catch on, in other words, with the interest? Well, of course, I didn't pay too much attention to the younger generation. I'm kept more with my own. And I had friends there who were from Sweden. And they were married. A lot of, several, there was Mr... I had just an old, not just Oldenburg, just a Flodström. Did you ever meet him? Flodström. Flodström. Sven Flodström? No, just a Flodström. Well, he and his wife were both from Sweden. And his wife was working at the Swedish consulate too. And then, of course, there were several Swedish engineers there, many engineers. And they all had very lovely homes. And so I was social with a lot of these people in Chicago. So then I am sure you met Selma Jacobsen also? I can't remember. I can't. She was a younger person. She was a teacher. Is she still living? Oh, yes. She is. She was very active. Oh, she's been very active. Do you know anything about the Swedish Museum? Yes, they bought a house now. Yeah, I know they have. They're up at Andersonville, aren't they? Clark Street. So the north side of Chicago, according to your idea, there was more life there than on the south. Oh, yes. Did you go to the Swedish club on the south side? Or there was also a lot of... I never went to the Swedish club on the south. No, I never did. To me, it seems to me that that was closed. Already then? I think it was already closed because I don't think there was anything going on. Of course, they did have several... not lodges, but they had circles, Swedish circles of different kinds. Did you join any other organizations in Chicago, like American Daughters of Sweden? No, I didn't join them. No, I didn't join them. Oh, you attended. But of course, there was a lot of that going on over there. And... Did you join the Swedish Church in Chicago? No, I didn't join. I always belonged to the church here in Omaha. So I pay my dues here. You know, well, you can't belong to everything. Kind of costly. Well, I tell you, and they're always begging for more. So during the war time, then, you spent in Canada. Was there a hard time in the Canadian provinces? Well, we didn't... I can't say that we suffered. Of course, we all had to have tickets or whatever they call them, you know, in order to buy different things, coffee and such. Would you travel freely between the United States and Canada? Yes, I used to travel between Canada. My sister and brother-in-law lived here in Omaha. So every Christmas, I would come down from Montreal and spend Christmas here with them. Could you see the difference, then, between the two countries? Well, yes, there was quite a lot of difference. What was the biggest difference you think you saw? Well, I really don't know. The one or... Well, I don't know. Of course, the Swedes in Montreal, they tried to carry on the traditions there as much as the Swedes here. But there was always a little difference. I don't know whether it was just the fact that it was a French settlement. I mean, it was more or less a French province. So the Swedes didn't mingle around with the French people, though? No, not that I can remember. It was a complete, almost like a war. It seems so, seems so. How big continent of Swedes were there in Montreal? How many what? How many Swedes, do you think? Oh, I haven't any idea. Not too many. Well, there wasn't a... The colony, the Swedish colony, there wasn't like the one here, huh? There were no clubs or lodges or anything? Well, they did have a Scandinavian club, I remember. They called it Scandinavian? They called it the Scandinavian club, but I don't think that that was... They didn't think that was such a proper place for people to go to. Although they did have pretty good food there, I remember. But it wasn't like the Chicago Swedish clubs, nothing. You couldn't even compare with that. They were not strong enough then to make it up to Snufs, so to speak. So anyway, that's the story of Canada. I mean, my opinion of Canada. So when you get to transfer to Chicago then, was there a happy time for you to come back? Yes, I had a little trouble getting transferred, but I finally did. So you asked for a transfer, you were tired of that? Well, yes. No, I wasn't exactly asking for it, because it seems that Mrs. Oldenburg had a sister who was working in the consulate with... for Consul Oldenburg, and she wanted to go back to Sweden. And so there was an office, there was a place there that was vacant. So Oldenburg asked me if I would come to Chicago. Well, of course, I was very happy to come to Chicago, because I'd be closer to Omaha where my family was. And so anyway, I don't know, did you ever hear of Per Vikman? Yes, I heard of him, yes. I don't know him, but... Well, he was the ambassador, I would say, in... I guess you'd call him ambassador, in Montreal. First he was Consul General, and then he became ambassador, and he moved to Ottawa. Anyway, Mr. Oldenburg would write to him and ask him if he would consent to having me come to Chicago. So he called me one day and he says, I understand that Mr. Oldenburg would like to have you come to Chicago. I said, yes, and I would like to go. So he said, well, we'll have to see about that. Was he your boss then? Yeah, Vikman was my boss at that time. So that time, I took the longest time before he ever came through and said that I could go. So finally, one day I was fed up with it, because I was ready to leave anytime. It was just the... The war was so wearing there, you know, in Montreal. I mean, every... And we had these ships coming in, and the sailors, and all this and that. And it was just getting to be too much. It was really very heavy work there. Did you have to go down to the ships too sometimes? Well, we did. I did go down to the ships sometimes. But my friend Dagmar Svensson, who was... She was better used to talking to the seamen than I was. So we would go down and climb the rope up to... And so that was fun. And then, of course, the captains would invite us to lunch and dinner, and we would have one schnapps after another, you know. You didn't even go to the good tempers then. Far from that. So anyway, in the meantime, we... So anyway, then finally, one day I said to... I called Mr. Oldenburg on the telephone, and I said, I wish you would call Mr. Vickman and tell him that you have to have me come down to Chicago. So he did. So Vickman, right away, he called me, and he says, I understand that Mr. Oldenburg wants you to come immediately. So I said, well, that's all right with me. So that was how I happened to get to Chicago. You packed your bags and off to... I packed my bags and packed my furniture. I had an apartment in Montreal. And so that's the way it was. So my furniture has gone from Omaha to Montreal, Montreal to Chicago, Montreal to Sun City, Arizona. No, Chicago to Sun City, Arizona. So you retired there. I, yes, I was in Sun City, Arizona for 22 years. I just came back here in six months ago. And... Do you still have the home then in Sun City? No, I sold it. I sold my home. I had... First, I had a home. My sister and brother-in-law were there. They were ill. So they wanted me to come down there to be with them. And I was with them for a while. And then I bought my own home. And my brother-in-law passed away. And my sister was a cripple, was crippled with arthritis. So then her daughter wanted her to come back here and come into a retirement home. So she was in a retirement home for several years. And then she died three years, four years ago. And so, but in the meantime, of course, I was trying to help them out too, you know. So you wanted to be close by. Mm-hmm. So working off for... You've been working for Swedes then, really Swedes. Well, I'm trying to. You've been working for Odenberg and Jernstedt. Yes. Which one was best and more... Oh, Odenberg. Odenberg. Was he more relaxed? Oh, he was relaxed. He was a wonderful... I don't know. He was just like an old shoe, you know. He was a good fit. Yes. And he was very... He took an interest in everything and everybody. And Jernstedt was more straight-laced. Prestigious. Yes. And even in private, he looked like... Well, of course, I wasn't with him so much in private, you know, socializing, of course. But in the office... In the office, it was like this. At least that's the way I found it. And... But I enjoyed working with him. And so... And of course, Odenberg had... He was more like a father to the whole... To the office force, you know. And... Did he represent the consulate at the various doings in Chicago? There must have been a hundred... Side two continuation with Emina Inquist, Omar Nevreska. Side two. And then you get visitors from Sweden, from the royal house, for instance. Prince... Oh, Prince Bernadotte. Yeah, the Bernadotte. And at the beginning of the war, it was Bernadotte. Yeah, the Bernadotte. What was his name? Folke. Folke. No, Folke was the one that was killed in Africa. No, wasn't he? It was his... I think it was his aunt. What was her name? Ebba. I believe it was Ebba. Oh, that was her mother, wasn't it? No, I don't really know. I can't remember. Anyway, the Bernadottes, they were connected with the Red Cross. You remember that? They came over and they were in Montreal, I remember. And I was with them one afternoon. It was during the war. They were sent over from Sweden to... Apparently, I don't know what they were here. They were doing some connection with something at the Red Cross. So you had to help out and to... Yeah, so we... Yes, but that was when... Who was there then? Oh, it was... Riechmann was here at that time. How was he to work for? Was he... What was he? How was he to work for? Well, he was all right. He was rather strict in some ways. In some ways, he was rather lenient. But he was all right. But he was always busy doing something else. I mean, he was always trying to create a new legation, you know. So he was in Ottawa much of the time. But... And he was married to Ruth Wallace. She was a sister to the vice president, Henry Wallace. You remember when he ran with Roosevelt the first time? So he was married to an American then? Yeah, she was married to him. But she spoke Swedish very well. She did? Uh-huh. She learned... She... Apparently, she had gone over to Sweden and I don't know whether she... I imagine she must have studied Swedish because she spoke Swedish very well. In fact, many times she would call me on the telephone and speak Swedish. I said, oh, please speak English. Oh, did she ever learn? Oh, I think she... They have children then? Oh, I think she's... He's gone. He's dead. But she's still living in Des Moines, Iowa. In Des Moines? Yeah, you see, her father was the agricultural secretary during the time of one of the... I don't know which president that was. Wilson, I guess it must have been. Way back then sometime. I don't know. And then... She must be old, though. Well, she's... I imagine she's in her 90s, no doubt. And... Have you been talking to her? I haven't contacted her in years. And... But he was... Then after he left Montreal or Ottawa, he was transferred to India, Wichman, Perivichman. And... But she refused to go to India. She said, you go. I'll stay here. So she stayed. So I think eventually she moved to Des Moines. But in the telephone book, she's listed as Mrs. Perivichman. So apparently they were not divorced. But she refused to go to India. Yeah, she didn't want to go to India. I don't blame her. I wouldn't either. Well, at that time, I suppose it was primitive. Well, maybe, I don't know. I don't know. I think... I'm sure it was India. But they had children? Oh, yes. They had three or four children. Several children. And... Well, I don't know. I heard some funny tales about him. But he was rather nasty towards her. He liked his drinks. He used to drink martinis at night, you know. That's what I heard. Now, don't put that... It is there. Like the consular offices now, you know, they have the liquor, of course, from their home. In other words, they don't have to pay any customs. No, that's right. It's quite inexpensive. And they can probably be a danger if they get used to it too much. Well... There's easy access to it. Oh, sure, sure, sure. But that's... I understand that he was... He was drinking quite a bit during... Not during the office hours, but at night. You know, in Sweden, you are familiar with... In this country, you call everybody du, you know, if you translate it to Swedish. Yeah. But you didn't have that relation with either one of Wittmann, Oldenburg, or Jenstedt. Did you call them du in Swedish? No. You spoke Swedish to them? I didn't speak Swedish to them. I always spoke English with them. Did you call them Mr. and Mrs.? Oh, I always called him Mr. Oldenburg. Never the first name? No. But I think that they were loosening up later on. Oh, yes, I think so. Because I know that I had notes from Jenstedt, you know, after I left Chicago. Then he would call me by my first name. Derham, Der... Of course, you called him the bu, for instance? No, I didn't call him bu. You didn't call him the... Mm-hmm....abdullet. So, in that way, well, you know, it's... Of course, I don't like this being too intimate with your boss. I like to be a little bit... Sub. Sub. Yes, but I mean... It must be a strain if they are too strict, like Jens, for instance, like the military. Mm-hmm. Day after day after day after day. Don't you feel a pressure on yourself that you're doing things right, or...? Oh, well, yes, you felt that way. But as long as you knew that you were doing the right thing, well, you... Did he hesitate to correct you if he... Oh, yeah, he would call... He'd correct... I remember one time he called me and... I can't remember who it was. Oh, I used to take care of some of these things. They call it efterforschner. Efterforschner, right. And I called someone. I don't know how it was. Anyway, there was... He was related to some woman who was a wife of one of the men who was in the office of the commerce secretary. And I said... Hans Kammerer. Pardon? Hans Kammerer. Yeah. And so I was asked one time if I knew something about them. I said, well, I think that's Mr. Oldenburg's sister-in-law or something like that. He heard about that and he wondered where I got that information. I said, well, I didn't know that was supposed to be secret. I said, I'm sorry, but I didn't know it was supposed to be secret. Well, it seems that they weren't on good terms and that one shouldn't even mention. So he wondered where I got it. I said, well, I think one of the vice consuls mentioned it to me one time. So, but you know, little things like that, why sometimes it would be... Aggravated, huh? Yeah. How many of his staff was it in... Well, when I was there, they had several Swedish secretaries. Direct from Sweden? Mm-hmm. And of course they were put up in nice apartments, you know. I had to pay my own rent for my apartment, you see, but they didn't because they were from Sweden. Oh, I thought they would pay the rent. No, not the Americans. Not the ones that... I see. But there was a difference then then. Mm-hmm. Yeah, but you were paid the equivalent to the Swedish. Well, I was paid enough to take care of my apartment anyway. Do you get Swedish pension, for instance? Yes, I get a little Swedish pension. But it's, like I say, you know, it is different, I think, now altogether. I don't know whether they have any American, you know, people working there for them in the Swedish consul. I think they're mostly all Swedish. Well, they could be. I think they are. I don't know. I've tried to keep in contact with them, but I never... It's difficult just to keep, you know, when you aren't there, you don't really know because you don't get the information. You haven't been back in Chicago for many years. I beg your pardon? You haven't been back in Chicago for many years. No, I haven't been back. I was back about 10 years ago, I guess. But I haven't been back. I have this problem with my walking now, arthritis. And so Chicago is no place for me. How did you like Chicago otherwise? Oh, I liked it. Always something doing there. There's always excitement in Chicago. But now, of course, it's... Chicago has grown so tremendously. So you lived the walking distance then from the office? No, not particularly. I used to have to take the bus. I took the bus and went down Michigan Avenue. So you were located on the best... I was in a nice area....of the United States. It was, it was nice. So I enjoyed living in Chicago. I was going to ask you now on... Have you been politically involved with either party, like Republican or Democrat? No, I'm a Republican. You're a Republican. I've always... I guess it's just because my parents were always Republicans, so I haven't... Did you discuss anything there with the people in the community? No, I didn't. Was there anything there with the people in the consulate with the Jernstedt and all of them? Oh, no, I don't think we even... I didn't even dare to touch that. There was a no-no. Oh, yes, that's more or less a no-no. I suppose they make their opinion made clear... Yeah, that's right....when you were together with them, but you never discussed anything with them. No, I didn't. Well, you know, you just don't have time to discuss things. It's mostly all business or office work, you know, that you talk about. All the time. And you visited Sweden, you said? Oh, yes, I've been over there several times. The first time you went over? The first time I went over by myself, alone. Was your father still living then? No. This is 1930 I went over. 1930? It was during the Depression. Yeah, it was the Depression. And I went over and visited with my aunt and uncles and... my aunts and uncles and cousins and all of those. I became acquainted with them. And then I... One cousin is married... Well, of course, at that time she wasn't married, but later on she married Eric Bjorkman, who was a professor of forestry in Stockholm High School. And he passed away. She has been over here several times to visit. And so I keep in touch with her all the time. She has three sons, and they're all living in Stockholm. So you stayed six months then, the first time? Yes, I stayed there for almost six months. Was there for... Did you study anything there, or only for visiting? No, I was there just visiting. I think I was too lazy to do anything else but visit. How was the Depression for your family, you live with now? Well, it wasn't... I don't think that anyone... We suffered from it. Of course, you knew that everything was very cheap, you know. But there was no choice or money. And... but things... But there was always... We always had means to buy things with. So it wasn't bad. Like some people were just destitute, you know. But it wasn't too bad. My sister was married at the time. She was married to Martin Swearee. And are you... were you born in Sweden? Yes. And what part of Sweden? Norsland. Norsland? Norsland. It's west of Lake Venen. What town? Lake Venen. The big lake in Sweden. Oh yes, I know which one that is. The smaller one, Lake Betten. But... and so I was living with... I mean, I was visiting most of the time with my aunt and uncle in Småland. Värnamo. So you were able to speak Swedish with them and you had no trouble to understand what they said? Oh, I didn't have... In fact, that's... at the time I learned more Swedish then than I had before. You picked up better. Because I was... had to speak Swedish. And so that my... and that uncle was a... he was a head of... he was agronom. And he was the head of one of the schools in Norland. What was the name of it? I can't remember the name of the school. So he lived up there then? Yeah, he lived... but then in the summertime... He was up there in the summertime and in the wintertime he'd come down to Värnamo and he was teaching agriculture there. So they were well to do then? They had a very nice home and it was their daughter who was married to Erik Bjorkman. I see, so you came into an educated family. It was a good family. You didn't have any intention to stay on in Sweden, though? Oh, there were times I thought I'd love to stay in Sweden and then my sister would write to me and she said, I think you better come home. Why was it that attracted you to Sweden? Oh, I don't know. I just thought... Of course, I think it was because I was young and I was having fun. I was having a good time. Was life different there? The pace? No, no, it wasn't any different except that it was... It was quite... it was nice. I mean, of course, you know, when you're young and you have... and you meet people your own age and you can go dancing and have fun, you know, it makes a great deal of difference. So their home now, agronomists and the professors, their homes compared to the one you lived there in Omaha, were they comparable? Well, of course, at that time there wasn't any... You couldn't even... you couldn't compare the two because... no, you couldn't because they were at that time, they were living in... Well, the agronomist, of course, he had his home. He had built a nice home in Värnamo. Did he have a bathroom, for instance, around the house? Oh, yes, yes. Had that in Central Heath? Oh, yes, they had very good... everything was very good. No refrigerator at that time. And but it wasn't... and I... but a lot of other places, of course, didn't have those things, even in this country. So the next time you visited was after the war? Yes, that was in 53. Did you meet the same people then? Yes, of course, by that time they were grown up. They were older. How much older than you then were? Here's Pauline, come on in. There's Pauline. You're so quiet. You're better than I. How about... It starts early with me. So, yeah, the next time you visited Sweden, then you met the same people, like Rolman and Bjorkman. Oh, sure. They were still living there, but they were older then. Yeah, they were older. Of course, the first time I was there, I didn't know... I didn't know Bjorkman the first time I was there, because his wife was just 12 years old then. Oh, I see. And... but Bjorkman was... of course, he was way up high in the academics, you know, and he... Did you stay with him? Well, I have stayed with him in the times I've been there recently. Of course, I haven't been there now since 72. And he passed away in 73, I think, Bjorkman. But she has a beautiful home outside of Stockholm, Stok Sund. She has a very lovely home there. And do you have cousins in Sweden? Well, she's my cousin. She's my cousin. Cheston Bjorkman is my cousin. Leon and I had some other cousins, but I didn't... I couldn't keep track of everybody, you know. And... but I've kept track of her, because she's been able to come over here several times. Bjorkman had a... he came over to Syracuse, New York, to teach in the university for one year. He had a fellowship over here. So he was over here for about... for a year. So the whole family came over. The three... they had three sons. And they came on over, and he was teaching at Syracuse. So they're very well acquainted with the United States. They know the United States very well. Well, that's interesting. And have you been in Mexico now? No, I... well, I haven't been in Mexico since... I think it was 68, 60. 68? Mm-hmm, I was... I was down there then, and I was... I didn't go down to Durango. I didn't go to Durango. I went to Mexico City. On your mother's side, you never found out or traced anything there? Mm-hmm. There was no way to do that? No, there was no way. You had no idea when she died, either, or... No, I think... I think I was... I think they told me she died about... I don't know, must have been in the 1920s or something like that. She was quite young. So... How do you feel now? I mean, do you have anything of interest to... going to the Mexican culture, because you have your mother's side now? Well, I... well, you know, you just... Have you felt drawn to that culture, or... Well, I haven't, particularly. Not particularly, but of course, you know, when you go down there, then you feel you want to do things... I mean, you want to buy this and you want to buy that, because you think it's interesting. Something that you are attracted to? That you're attracted to, yes. You can feel that, that you are part of it. Yes, that's right. But you were not... In other words, your mother was not present when you started to ask questions about it? No. No, she passed away when I was very young. She passed away when I was very young. So that was... Of course, my adopted mother died in 1920, and my adopted father died in 26. So that was... So that family went out, and you were there? Well, of course, I still have a cousin here. P.A. Edquist came over... Well, I think I have it down there, when he came over about 1882, 84, I don't know what it was. 87. Oh, 87. He was about 87. Yeah. Yeah, he would have been 25 years old about that time, I think so. And he had three brothers. Three brothers who also came to Omaha, and they all went in business. They were butchers, you know, meat market. They had meat markets. Were they trained in Sweden for that? Well, they were all brought up on the farm in Östergötland. And P.A., of course, he was the one that had the education. He was the engineer. And then the other, the three others, I guess they just, I don't know what they... I don't think they had too much education, but they were all very fine men, and they made a very good living over here. I know this, the one who was the father of Mrs. Swanson, who was living here, Anna Swanson. She's 93 years old, and she's so alert, she knows everything that's going on. She's here on the... Mm-hmm, she's here. And she's related to you? And she's related to you? Well, she'd be my cousin. And he started the meat market, and then he invested his money in real estate. So by the time he passed away, well, he was quite wealthy. And so his daughter, Anna, married a young man who was in the... Oh, I don't know what you would call it. He was with the Union Pacific. And he was the drawer of maps, you know, for... Sure, yeah. Yes, and so I don't know. And then eventually he got into his own business. It was called the blueprint business, blueprint of maps and such. And he's just made, he made thousands. I don't know whether it was millions, but I think it was close to it. When he died, he was very wealthy. And now he's been gone about 15 years, I guess. So now she has three sons. No, two sons and a daughter and 21 great-grandchildren. And she says she too, she can't get around very well. But she's still sharp. Oh, she's very sharp, very alert. So they made it pretty good then? Oh, yes, very well. And did they belong to the noon club? There was a fashionable club here in... Well, P.A. was one of the founders of the noon day club, the founders of it. Back in 1908 or... 1908 or 1909. And then he became president of it later on. And of course, that club is still running. Now they take on anybody. They take on the Danes and the Norwegians. And if an Irishman is married to a Swede, well, he can get in too. But to start with, it was only business, Swedish businessmen. Just Swedish businessmen. They met downtown, they met down at one of the hotels for luncheons, I think once a month. Then they had various programs and doings and banquets once or twice a year. But did you attend? It was only for men? It was just for men. No women allowed. But when they had their banquets, though... Oh, when the banquets... Oh, that was the big thing for the... That was an annual banquet that they had, and that was everything. Did you attend any of them? Oh, yes, I used to go to them. And that was downtown and one of the hotels? It was downtown, one of the hotels or someplace. It was quite interesting. So there were quite a few Swedish businessmen here. Butchers and meat market and tailors. Oh, yes, all kinds. Doctors, doctors. Oh, many doctors. There were many doctors. And then there was this... My brother-in-law was connected with the J.F. Blum Company, which is the manufacturer of monuments, you know, for stones, for grave stones and all those things. And mausoleums. So my brother-in-law started there when he first came from Sweden. And then he was up, up, up. So when he passed away, when he retired, he was vice president of the company. So he had done very well. So there seems to be... There always seemed to be some way that these people could advance, you know. I mean, if they had something up here, well, they advanced very well. And they stuck to it. And they stuck with it. They didn't give up in the first place. It was tough in the beginning, I suppose. That's right. The language was probably one of the worst... It was difficult. But of course, my brother-in-law Martin Swery, he was... He realized that. So he was taking English courses at night before he married my sister. He spoke English very well. Did he have any children? Yeah, he had two daughters. Two daughters. Two daughters. Two daughters. Did they have any normal? No, one passed away several years ago, and one is living here. Of course, she doesn't know any Swedish, but she loves... She carries on the traditions. The Swedish, you laugh at them. And Christmas Eve, she does everything. She even makes limpa. And she prepares everything except lutefisk. That they don't want. How about you now? Did you like lutefisk? Oh, I like it, but I don't like it for steady dice. So most of the people then carry on the tradition of the secular tradition. Well, at least she does. She does. But there are a lot of them, of course, that don't do that, you know. I was wondering, there is a woman who is married to one of the prominent lawyers here in town. She came over from Sweden. Her name is Agneta. Have you heard her name? Agneta. Oh dear. Pauline can tell you her name. Agneta something or other. I think her last name was Ericsson. I don't know. She hasn't arrived lately? Oh no, that was several years ago. But she's still living in Omaha, and she's very much connected with the Emanuel Hospital. I mean, helping them doing things. I think you can put that down to get the name of Agneta Haynes Harms. I can't think of her husband's. He's an attorney here. What about baking? Baking. She would bake rye bread, rye bread. Rye bread, yeah. And she would make Wätebulle, you know, roll them out. And coffee, coffee bread. So you don't remember any white bread to the meal where you ate? They came in later. There was always rye bread to the meal. It was mostly always rye bread. And the white bread, that was the more coffee type. That was the, yeah, or else you bought the white bread. But the rye bread, she always baked that. But you didn't have to continue baking though, because you were alone and didn't pay to bake. Oh, well, I have, I do. I like to bake bread, but of course here you don't have to because you have your food right here, you see. So I wonder, I thought Mr. Lindwall was going to show up. He didn't show up. Well, maybe he was busy with something else. And there are still a few Swedes left, or old timers. Oh, yes. What do they talk about now when you come together with them? Oh, of course, I don't know. A lot of, a lot of them seem to have forgotten so much about Sweden. Do they comment about the good old times at any time? There was many years ago. I suppose maybe after a couple shots of whiskey. Then they start to remember. Then they start to remember. But was the old times good though? I mean, if you compare it to today. Well, not to compare to this, not to compare to today, I don't think you could compare them. So you can see your age group now, and you have it so much better than your age group. Well, I think, I think I was in a better, you know, better sphere. Situation. A situation than those, than a lot of them. But, you know, the Swedes are very energetic. They were energetic. I don't know if they are anymore, but they were energetic. And they would do anything to keep going and to make, not to make money, but to make, so that they could at least eat and have a nice home. And they all had good homes. Did they have their own homes? Yes, I think most of them. Most of them? My adopted father brought his own home here. Did you live in different homes or just one home all the time? We lived in one home all the time. And there was close to, what was the Swedish neighborhood now in Omaha? Well, there were a lot of them. There was one on the north side. In Benson, Florence. And then, of course, through Benson and in this area. This, in fact, this hospital, all the acreage was run, it was a dairy farm by a man named Sorensen. Was he a Danish? Danish. And he had this, he sold, he had, he sold the milk, you know. They sold it in bottles or whatever it was. I don't remember. And then I guess he retired and he sold all this acreage to the Emanuel Hospital. So that's how this place got started. And you also remember the old place down on 36th or was it? The old...