 We have April 23rd, 1987. And I'm sitting together with Sigrid Johnson in Rockford, Illinois. She was born 13th of November, 1900, in Ludington, Michigan. Your father-in-law, Andrew Engstrom, he came from Swin. Do you know what year he came to the United States? I have no idea. But that was before 1900, though. Oh, yes. My oldest brother... My two brothers were doctors, were carpenters here in Rockford. And my oldest brother was born in Chicago. And then they had a sister of his that had bought a farm out there near Ludington. And they envigled to see my father and the family to come there and buy a farm up there. So that's how we landed on a farm up there five miles east of Ludington. Ludington. Uh-huh. But my dad was a plumber from Sweden. He was the supervisor of a lot of the plumbing that was done in Lincoln Park in Chicago. That was when they lived there, years ago. So he came to Chicago first, then, you know. Yes, uh-huh. And then he got the hands of the farming. Uh-huh. And up there. In Sweden, was he trained for a plumbing job? Evidently was, yes. He worked perhaps in Karlstad, then? Well, I'm not sure. As I say, I wish I had had bought a diary, started one, so I would know because it would be interesting. But those days, I guess we didn't think enough about it. And you never had any contact with any cousins in Sweden? No, because my mother only had one sister. And then, of course, she came here, too, to this country from Sweden. How about your father, now, on his side? Well, all of his folks had come here. He had, was it three? I don't remember, three or four sisters. And he was the only boy in the family. And they all lived. And there was that one sister that lived on that farm, see, that got him to come up to Ludington. And the others, of course, they were spread around the country. This farm in Ludington, there, five miles east, was it a big farm, or? Well, I can't tell you how many acres. I wouldn't remember. Do you remember you growing up there in Ludington, now? Oh, yeah. This thing in the... You went to school there and to church? Yeah, sure. Sure, Dad used to have... I was confirmed in Swedish, in the Swedish Free Church in Ludington. And my dad started a brewery, as I say, five miles east. And, of course, transportation then was mostly by horse and buggy. We used to, may I never forget, we used to drive to Ludington. And if we met a car, why, those horses would go on their... Oh, boy, I was always afraid because I prayed they'd run away because they were so afraid, you know, of an automobile. It was not a normal thing, then, to see a car. No, it wasn't at that time when we used to drive. But then my dad started the Sunday school class of all the different farms around Chicago. On Sunday afternoons, he had a Sunday school class that we met on the different farms. Obviously. So he was a teacher then? Yeah, he taught Sunday school. So he was a religious man? Oh, yes, very much so. Mother, too. Were they Lutherans when they came from Sweden, or were they Covenanters, perhaps? I don't know because I was, as I said, I was confirmed in the Free Church in Ludington. So I really don't know. There was the church they joined up there? That they joined up there, mm-hmm. So you were four sisters and brothers, two boys and two girls. Two boys and girls, mm-hmm. You were the one of the youngest, or...? Yes, I was the youngest. I see. Now, my older brother was only living, he passed away, well, it'll be three years this year. He was 96. He was in another home here in Rockford. I see. And he could tell you almost all these things, but as I say, I don't remember. So you didn't have to help out too much on the farm then because you were the last... That's right. I didn't do much on the farm. You had some service when the older kids then, perhaps? But I was very musical. I see. Were you the only one in the family that were...? No, we were all musical in the family. You played instruments? Well, I sang mostly, see. And, of course, they didn't have any money to buy things in, you know, like they do nowadays. Buy them on time, credit. But, boy, I used to sneak away across because this... We had very dear friends that lived near the schoolhouse, which was a mile or more away that we went to. And they lived near there, but you had to cross the railroad track. And I'd run across the farm, across the whatever you want to call it, and over to their house, which was quite a ways. And they had an old organ, one of those years, those high ones with the shelves with the brick banks on the shelves and so forth. And, of course, in those days, they had the parlor and the sitting room and everything, and you weren't allowed in the parlor there. There wasn't any other special occasions? There was only special occasions. And this is where that organ was, but she always let me come in there. And I would, of course, it was a pump organ, you know. But, boy, when I was in my glory, when I could get over there and play... Were you standing and pumping the organ then because you were thirty-something? No, no. No, I... You were old enough then to reach down to a pump? Well, I was then probably just about five, six years old only. Who taught you not to play? Nobody. Nobody. I play now and I've never had any lessons. The Lord just gave me what I had, and he gave me a voice. I used to sing all over Chicago, you know. I used to sing. See, I was soloist at the Ravensburg Press Church in Chicago for nineteen years. I had one of my choirs for seventeen years in Chicago. When I came to Rockford, I've had all kinds of choirs and junior choirs. You come in my room, I'll show you my big choir I had, and I'll let you read all the things that... I said, I wouldn't have to... you'd read it. I've got it all written down. Very good. I bet you like... that would explain it more to you. How... was that through the church that you got interested in singing? What kind of songs? Well, of course, when I was in Ludington and all that, I... See, they didn't... I sang in the church, you see. In the choir? When you were a small girl? Yes. Well, then you see, we were in... we moved to town. I would say I was around eight years old when we moved to town. To Ludington. To Ludington from the farm. He left the farm then and started something else. He did plumbing then in Ludington, see. But, of course, I was hurt. Someone said... knocked me on the ice. And so I was very, very sick, and Mother didn't know it. And one day they found me, came to get me up for school, and discovered I was in one of these spells. It was like... almost like an epileptic fit. You know, my eyes would go like this, and my mouth would go up, and my ears like this, you know. And, oh, they gave me such medicine. It looked like molasses almost. But in those days, they didn't have capsules. You know, and they'd put it on a spoon, and they would... Oh, you know, I'd rip my teeth together because I didn't want to take that medicine. You know, bitter as it could be. Well, I didn't get any better, and they kept giving me stronger and stronger. So, anyway, I never got any better. So when we moved to town, I had this spell, Zen-Tufor. I don't remember how long it was that we moved to town. Then some lady met me when I was at the meat market for Mother to get something. And she... This lady had a piece of paper, and she wrote down the name. She said, here's the name of a doctor. Everybody in the small town knew that I had these spells. And... Could they find out or figure out what it was? No, never found. The doctors didn't know, and they used to give me stronger and stronger medicine. But this lady gave me the name of this doctor. She says, new doctor in town. She says, and can you have your dad take you to him and see? So I... He did. Right away that evening, he called. He was open. He said, I'm a chiropractor, Dr. A.J. Larson. In Sweden? Sweden. And after one adjustment, I never had a spell since in my life. What did he do then? Gave me an adjustment. Something was all wrong up in my neck here, something from not being knocked on the ice. But it had nothing to do with any malnutrition or anything? No, no. I don't take a bit of medicine now. No pills, no nothing. There's no wonder you didn't like the medicine. You had better sense than the doctor. And so, anyway, but you see what that medicine did? It ate up all the enamel on my teeth. When I was 11 years old, I had to have all these teeth cut off. And the dentist put pegs in from that medicine I took. There was so much acid in that medicine. Something, you see, just ate up all the enamel up. So that's how my brothers happened to take up chiropractic. And they went to this, then from Davenport, Iowa, at Palmer School of Chiropractic. In Davenport. Of course, their wives were there too. Before they were married, then they met their wives there. And they also had their medical exams too, all four of them. So there must have been a tremendous boost for the chiropractic. Oh, yeah. When they heard about this, because I'm sure people were starting to talk about it. Oh, yeah. Oh, sure. So you got well immediately, after the first visit? Yes. And you never went back again? Well, I took several adjustments. Oh, now I go at least once a month I go to the chiropractor and get an adjustment. Because. In your spine and in your neck? Yes, and how, all the way down your spine. And that adjustment, that adjustment keeps your system going. So I don't take any medicine. Because you know that it's yourself, your body, knowing how to take care of it, that takes care of things. Whatever the Lord don't do, your body, you've got to take care of it. He can't take care of you. You certainly had the first-hand experience of it. That's right, that's right. You were very young. That's right. So there was a blessing you came into town on. Yes. Off to the farm, you would never get the help. No, I wouldn't have known about it. And in those days people didn't go to doctors too often. I mean, it was only when you were half dead, I suppose. Well, it was in the time when things were just beginning to see. I was going to say that I have lived in a great era because just look at the changes that have taken place. The car started, I started to drive the car. And, well, just think all the things that have transpired. Now up to the airplane and now they're going up to the moon. Just think the things that have expired since I've lived in a great era. And you've been taking part of it also. I understand you had the balloon ride not too long ago. That's right. Who gave you the idea? Well, our church had a picnic. And they, so they, for two, you know, the children always like to have fun, you know, and games. So they said they were giving away two balloon rides. And, of course, they're quite expensive, but I think it was a gentleman from, the pilot was a gentleman from one of the Lutheran churches here. And evidently they knew about him, you know. So our youth director had gotten him. So I think they got a little reduction in the price. But otherwise it's quite expensive to, well. In other words, you did not hesitate to go a step into the basket? Oh, no. No, I couldn't get in the basket because it was way up here, you know. And so one man that I knew real well, he just took and lifted me right into the basket. But there's no door, right? No, no, no, no. They can't have anything like that. When you were lifted in there, I am sure you got some butterflies in your stomach. Well, I tell you, I was so excited that I guess maybe I didn't think much of it. People were all around, you know, watching. They might be more scared than you were. They said, oh, I would never go up. They said, how would you dare go up in that balloon? Because I used to watch it up here, you know, the balloon. I used to come up the street like I wrote. And I'd say, gee, I wonder who's up in that balloon. I said, I wonder how it would feel like up there. So never thinking I would ever be up there. So when it started to go up, you didn't feel any kind of sensation of being scared? No, no sensation. It was just as smooth as could be, you know. And of course, it went up quite fast, they said. I have some pictures here where I was waving to them, you know. Everything was quiet. The gas was going up. Yeah, that's right. And then when we were, you see, you have to be up 1,000 miles over a city. 1,000 feet. 1,000 feet, I mean. It's got to be 1,000 feet. It's the law. Yes, that's the law. And so we were up and down. Sometimes we'd go a little higher, and then we'd get a little lower down, you know, why he'd have to give her that gas. And of course, when they'd give them the gas, why it kind of makes a noise, you know. But then that only lasts for just a few seconds. And then they turn the gas off, and then you just float, you know. So you started at the Baptist Church, the Temple Baptist Church on State Street. And what did you have then, west or? No, you see, the wind took, they set up a balloon to see just exactly what would happen, see. Because the temperature and your weather conditions has to be just so, you know, for them to go up. And so they saw that it went north, you know. And so that's the direction I went. North? North, uh-huh. North all the way across. I went just between here and Highcrest, so I took some pictures of this place, see. Of course, I should have had tele lens, you know, where it would be larger. But anyway, I got a picture of it. So then I landed, went way up north and crossed the Machesne Mall up there. And then landed across the river and took some pictures of the boats on the river. And then we landed in some farm because it was getting dusk and they have to land before it gets dark, you know. And then, of course, the landing is different, you know. Because, you see, you have to, that's why he, I think he had, the only thing, we were three, the pilot and myself. And he took another lady along. She was a nurse. Whether he thought at my age that he should have a nurse along, I don't know. Although she was, had been up with him several times, she was the wife of one of the crew, the chief crewman. She was the wife, and so she'd been up many times. So that when we were going to start to go down, you know, of course the crew members, you know, had to follow. He talks to them all the way across as we go along. But I was going to say, because remember they said, watch out for the guide wires, you see. There were wires of telephone and I suppose electric and so forth. So I heard them say that, you know. And, but when we were going, starting to go down, why she said, just kind of bend your knees a little bit and ride with it. See, because he said that me, when we left here, he called for me here at the home in the car to take me down there to the park where we started from. But he said, oh, you're too dressed up, he said. And I said, no, I haven't been anything good on. So, but you see, sometimes when you're going down, you know, that basket kind of rolls, you know, and you have to kind of go with it, you know. And so they were kind of probably worried about me. We were up there about a half hour. And when he said, I'm getting tired, you know, because you have to stand all the time. And I said, no, I'm enjoying it. So we were up an hour and five minutes then before we landed. And, but then as we were landing, you know, I sort of crept my knees and I hung on to the ropes that are on the side of the gondola or whatever you call basket. And so my guns were saying, I know I, we landed, you know, and it was no trouble. It's just a smooth. I think that a lot of it is to according to the crew, if they, how they handle, because she threw down a real large roll of something. I don't know what it was about that wide. And she threw that down to one of the crew members. There's three crew members. And so, and of course, you see, then I have one picture where we just landed and then one of the crew members was holding onto that gondola, you know, because the minute that you land, you see the gas, of course, let's go. And the balloon starts going down. So in that, when that goes down, it pulls the basket. So you fall down like this. Did it descend fast so you could notice it or you didn't feel anything? No, I didn't feel anything. It just went just as smooth as could be, you know, down. Of course, I had a good pilot, but you and then, as I said, a good crew member. But when you took off now from Temple Baptist Church ground on the Dulkers Park, you had no idea where you were going to land though? No, no. Nobody knew that? No, no. I had three cars of people that followed. And one car couldn't follow. One got lost. One guy got lost. And so, but I was going to say, so that, when we landed, you know, you see after that balloon went down and then when, in order to get out, why, of course, this crewman that was holding onto this until the balloon had deflated, then, of course, the basket fell down. And so, they said, oh, you just, you get on top of me. So the pilot laid down first and then she laid on top of him and I laid on top of her. So it was a smooth landing then? And so then I said, I haven't been stepping all over you to get out of here. And oh, she said, so I just tried my level best, you know, to get out of there. But it went so fast, you know, it was wonderful, you know. So what did they ask you now when they finally reached your basket? Did they ask you how you felt or? Yeah, he said something about, because, you know, the people were walking up and down. He landed by a road, see one of the roads way out west, north of Roscoe out that way, across the river. And so they, you know, said, but I wasn't dizzy or anything, I just went along, you know, and waited out in the road by the roadside too until they started to fold up the hammock. So you were able to walk? Oh, sure. And then you see. I'm sure there's a lot of younger people, though, that wonder, you know, how you could stomach it. That's right, well, too, and they keep, they're still at church every Sunday or any other time during the week when I'm there and I meet people, they say, well, are you going up in the balloon again? Or they say, have you been up in your balloon yet? Some of them hadn't heard, you know, whether I'd gone up yet or not. Well, here you are, 86 years old and you're wondering, you know, how you would feel. Sure, and then I remember I don't take any medicine. You don't? Don't take any pills of any kind. Oh, I might take a vitamin now and then, but otherwise I don't. But you know how to take care of yourself, don't you? Well, I try to. I take adjustments, just once a month. And that really, that keeps me going. If we now go back to Ludington and your musical interest, both your father and your mother were very much in music. And your mother, she was also a soprano in Stockholm. Yeah, that's right. Was they in her youth before she came here? Yes, before she came here, see. So they met in Sweden, then, your father and Ludington? I think so, yes. They knew each other from Sweden. Was she also interested in religious songs? Oh yes, everything was religious until I started to get older, you know. Well, then you see, when we moved to Ludington and I got through grade school, was going on into high school, like I wrote in there, they didn't, a small town, it was a small town, then it's grown, of course now, but they had no music to mount anything, no, you know. Like here, they have all their madrigals and everything, you know. Well, I didn't have that opportunity when I was there. And there was no organ in your home? No, no. Well, finally, my dad bought me, bought a piano. A piano. Uh-huh. So, of course, and then I'd play for all the songs at church for them, but I never had any lessons. And they said, oh, you don't need any lessons. I remember my sister, she'd say, oh, she says, I'll do the dishes, you play the piano. So then you could practice. Yeah. Wasn't that kind of unusual at that time to buy a piano instead of an organ? Well. Were they coming in then more and more in the picture? Well, the pianos, of course, were coming in, but because this piano had been used for some kind of musical thing, because my father couldn't afford a brand new piano, so this was a secondhand, but it was a cable and a very good piano because it had been used for concerts of some type. But, oh, yes, when I think of how I was 16 years old when I had all these choirs, I was directing choirs there, you know, I had three of them. In Ludington. In Ludington. I was directing, but I could only direct one on Sunday, see. But I trained three of them, see, from Methodist Church and Lutheran Church and the Baptist Church. How were you able to do that without any... Any training? Yes, I mean, theoretically, no. I don't know. Reading notes and... I don't know. The Lord just gave me it. And I'd pick out the music and everything else, you know, for them. So I really... And nobody questioned your abilities. No. They all thought you were all from school. I suppose so. From the higher school of music. I suppose so. So how about now, Ludington is a tourist town, of course, in connection with Chicago. That's right. During the summers, did you have any experience then? Did you have any concerts up there? Well, that's when you see, they had the Epirus Heights was the... It's a high-class neighborhood. Yes, all resorters, you see, they'd go up there. Only for the summer. For the summer. And that's when they had this Madame Falske home, they had hired her from Chicago to train, give their children lessons while they were there. And then, of course, she gave a concert at the end, the auditorium they had there at Epirus Heights. And she advertised in the paper if anyone wanted lessons. And, of course, I thought, oh, dare I go, you know, and I kept putting it off. But I wanted to go the worst way and start to have some lessons. And finally I picked up enough nerve and I took a little old dummy that used to run up there to Epirus Heights and I went up there and talked to her. She said, sure. Well, then it was only about three weeks left of the season before they were back to Chicago. And so when she gave her concert, you know, in those three weeks she had me singing one of the operas. In three weeks? In three weeks I sang My Heart Will Die Sweet Voice, of course now I've sung it many times in French and everything, see. But those, then I, you know, did it in English. In three weeks I sang this My Heart Will Die Sweet Voice, you know. So she saw immediately that you were going to. Yes, that's right. Did she make any comments about it? Oh, yes, she asked, she wanted to know if I wouldn't come to Chicago to study. And that's how I came to Chicago then. Through her? Through her and came there and studied. And her name was? Madame Fauche-Cahoon. Cahoon? No, Cahoon. Cahoon. Uh-huh. She was, of course, a wonderful co-author soprano and so forth. And then, of course, when I went to Chicago I had such wonderful experiences like I did there. Were you able to finance this, though? How did you work then? Well, she was kind enough. When I got to Chicago I didn't know anybody. My parents were very disturbed because they knew I didn't know Chicago or anything. So they stayed in London and they let you go to Chicago? Oh, yes. Oh, yes. How old were you then? I was just 21. And then they, I was going to say, I had this here uncle that had played in this Messiah that lived there. And they said I could live with them. So I lived with them free for a while. But I only got there in October. I don't remember what year. Well, 21 it would be because I was 1900. And this Madame Foscahoon and her accompanist, Mrs. Jackson, they got me a position. Because, you see, when I didn't go to high school because I couldn't get music in Ludington, I went to business college. So I knew I did shorthand and bookkeeping and everything like that. I did that in Ludington. See, before, while I was doing all this music at night, you see. And so then when I got to Chicago, they got me this wonderful position with a German company, which were insurance brokers or something. They were a part of the USF&G, which is a big concern all over the country, United States Fidelity and Guarantee Company. And they were in the Continental Building in Chicago. And I was going to say that they gave me a job right away. And they got me this position. So then she offered me, I think it was $10 a lesson for a half hour. It was expensive at the time. Oh, yes. But she gave it to me for $5, see, because she knew I didn't have any money, see, to amount to anything. How much did you make then? You know I don't remember what I made. I don't remember how much I made. But it was a high price, $10 a lesson. That's right, that's right. Not too many could afford that one. That's right. But she was a teacher only for the well. That's right. Well to be paid. That's right, that's right. And I have a, what's it called here? So when you took those lessons, now then, you improved for everyone, of course, more and more, as you can see this. Oh, sure. And after a while you were singing duet with her. Oh, sure, no time. She wouldn't take anybody, I mean, just off the street. That's right. So you must have been pretty good. Well, I would have been able to go in the opera if I had been able to keep on, you know. But I tell you, I was going to say that, for instance, I sang it when they were trying out for the student prince in Chicago. That was back in those days, 20-somethings to early 20s. And so I could have gone with them. But I tell you, I had the feeling that if I, you know, with the student prince or any of those, you're maybe six months or maybe so long here, then you move to another place and then you're to another place and all that. And I just felt like I didn't want to do that. And so anyway, of course, I kept on taking voice, but finally, she moved away to – she got a wonderful position at the University of Fort Worth, Texas. And so she moved away then. And so I took lessons after from the Rudolphs in Chicago. It was a – Site 2, continuation with Sigurd Johnson, Rockford, Illinois. Site 2. Were you able to pick up any programs now that you could appear on or singing for somebody? Who did that? Well, you see, I hadn't – as I say, I got there in October or something. I remember I started to work and they let me off a half hour longer at noon so I could take my lesson twice a week. So they understood your desire to learn more. Oh, yeah. And so then – but then that – in the spring then, like in April, so the agencies in Chicago were looking – the churches were looking for talent. Well, especially the churches. Yes, were looking for talent. And so they – she's wanted me to appear, you know, and sing for them. And so, of course, I did whatever she told me to do, you know, my teacher. And so that she – when I appeared then, it was for the Surreptitious Presbyterian Church. And oh, there was – I know there was a great number. I can't remember. I was – I don't know if it was 30, but it was both sopranos and contraltos. I was always a contralto. And so we sang for them and I sang, Oh, Rest in the Lord, from Elijah, one of the oratorios. And, of course, I got it right away. And so I was with them 19 years as soloist. So you were paid on a regular basis then? Yes, but only Sunday mornings. Only Sunday mornings. Because then I had my choir at night that I directed. And then, oh, there's so many stories. I was with the Ladies Quartet and I sang. And I have a brochure here in my – what do you call it? See, in order to perform for these big – what should I say – for these high-class women's organizations, you had to be – had to appear before a council and sing, you know. You had to be approved. Had to be approved. And so I sang. I don't know if it was at the Fine Arts Building where they met and I had to appear before them. And, of course, they approved that I could. So I've got brochures here of my program that I used to do. And I did used to do – one group at the end was in English. Then I did some opera numbers in French, some in German, and a group in Swedish. And I had a Swedish costume made in Dalarna for me. Which group was that, Switzerland or – In Chicago? Yes. Oh, no, these were for all the different clubs all over. All different clubs. All different clubs. So you didn't belong to any Swedish singing – No, no, I didn't belong to any of the – Your church affiliation – did you transfer from the Free Church in Lovington to the Free Church in Chicago? No, no. I met my husband then and he – well, they were friends of my folks and my aunt that had lived in Chicago. And they were from the Baptist Church. So that's how I was – Addison Street? No, not at – oh, I sung at Addison Street many times in Chicago. There's a big Baptist Church. Yes, uh-huh. It's the first one in Chicago. Yeah, that's right. And I remember that when I first came there, our general conference had a big – you know, the whole country had their conference there. And I don't know what year it was now, but I hadn't been in Chicago very long, but I was the soloist there. And they had all this at the big Moody Church there. And I remember I sang, oh, it says, Seek ye the Lord. And I did all the solo parts in that when the choir sang. Did you at any time sing in the Swedish language? Oh, I sung many times. You should hear my tape I've got in Swedish. You performed at the different churches and – Oh, sure. Oh, sure. And then as I say at these programs, I always had one group of Swedish songs. Then I always gave the description of it before I sang it so they'd know what I was – How were you able not to keep all those different languages apart? Did you go to school – No, no. I sang – I think that knowing Swedish, it was easy for me to – Did you talk Swedish then in your youth and with your parents? Oh, sure. I was confirmed in Swedish, you see. So it was all Swedish then in your early years? Oh, yes, yes. Mostly all Swedish, you know, too. But I was going to say that singing in these different languages, I didn't know what I was singing, you know. But it comes easier to – It just came easy for me to sing them. I think because of knowing the Swedish language. So many of them now in German, you know, when the English people here are the ones that sing, you know, they have to – hard for them to sing German in some respects because they can't say – It's hard language, too. Yeah. You see, they say – You know. But it was never hard for me. It was the same thing in Swedish. You know, people can't – English people can't say – You know, if you say – If you say – So that means that you've got to be born with certain languages, like Germanic. It seems as if – It's too hard to – It just seems it was easier for me to grasp it. And although I never did, as I say, know just what I was singing. Were there any Swedish singers or performers that you look up to or studied? Did you remember the time you listened to – Any Swedish? Yeah. No. You listen to any records by someone or – Oh, I used to go to all the concerts in Chicago, in Orkster Hall. You know, like Sigurd O'Nagin and Gilly and O'Bierling and all of those. You know, when they did concerts, I was always there. In fact, you see, my teacher also put me in what was the American Federation of Musicians, which was covered a great area, you see. And I had a peer – I don't know how many times – at Lion Healy Room, their concert room. And the judges were behind walls, you see, so they couldn't see you. And they put me in – she put me in this contest, you see. And they had, oh, I don't know how many, just contraltos and sopranos. And they had pianists and violinists and so forth. And I won that con – So I sang at Orkster Hall, and I sang the sequel to this, Moqueuse du Rattabois from Saint-Saëns. I sang the Amour Viens et D'E. The sequel to that in French, of course, in Orkster Hall. So when you came back out to Levington after the Swedish settlement up there, what did they think about you then? You had stepped away from the Swedish background. Well, I tell you, I don't know, for some reason or other, I never went back there very much because Mother was never very well. She was very sickly. And she had many operations. And so that I got married early in Chicago simply because she had been – or she was going to have an operation. She had a goiter. Those days they didn't know what to do for goiters. She'd had one operation here, and that, you know, they had dug for these here fingers, as they call them, or that, that the goiters have, you know. And so they touched her heart somewhere, see. And so she never was well. But when she had part of the goiter left, they said, well, if you just had that out, she thought she'd be well. But, see, this had done the damage. But we thought to satisfy her, we let Percy operate her at Augustan in Chicago. And I got married the day before she got to come home from the hospital so that I could take her to my apartment in Chicago. And my brothers were, of course, chiropractors. Did you live? No. One was in Freeport and one in Rockford. Oh, I see. So they moved out there. See, they were living here at that time. And, see, my one brother that I told you just passed away that was 96, he had his office in the American Bank Building here, Swedish-American then, for 23 years he had his office there. And so they brought her here, but then they brought her to Chicago to have this operation. But they came along to watch the operation. Your father, was he already dead then? Yes. So he died first then. Wait a minute, wait a minute. I'm wrong. He was living. He was living? He was living. Was he up in Ludington then? Well, yes. He would go between. He'd come here to my brother's and to my place in Chicago and then to Ludington, see. But he still had a place to go to in Ludington. But your parents must have been proud of you, though. I mean, two doctors here and a performer on the world stage. Well, anyway, I remember forgetting that they said that the doctor operated, you know, he just, all he did was slip like that and the thing just popped out. See, it wasn't this part that did it, it was this part where they had dug in that. That was a specialist in Manistee, Michigan, which is near Ludington. Manistee, I know. And so I've had so many experiences. So you didn't go back too often then to Ludington to your old information? No, I didn't. I didn't. Because, I tell you, my sister worked for a banker, and he wanted her to go to a bank that he had many banks all over Michigan. His name was McPhail. And, oh, he had me take care of his office. He had, he, when I was only about 16, 17 years old, I was there taking care of his office. He'd let me sign checks for him even. And he had a lot of property down in Tucumcari, New Mexico. They went south every winter. They lived in Nepperth Heights too, see. And so he had my sister go up to Patoskey, Michigan. You know that's a beautiful place in Traverse City where my brother and me. There's chicken orchards. And I mean cherry. Cherry, yes, cherry. I said chicken, but I mean cherry. Cherry, that's right. Beautiful up there, you know. And, of course, at Patoskey, you know, with all the famous, what's called. So all your kids then fare pretty well then, you know. Oh, yes. Her husband was president of the bank at Patoskey for 35, 38 years. Is she still living, your sister? I'm going to go next week, week after next, to see her now. She's in a home in Grand Rapids, Michigan. She's 92 years old. 92. In Grand Rapids. So I'm going to go and see her. And she has only one son, and he is in Holland, Michigan. In the Dutch area. And he, of course, was– I could tell you should hear a story about him. He, a wonderful one, of course, you know, he's older now. But he was attorney at Holland for many years and all that. But now he's almost ready to retire, whether he's got another couple years or so. He's a circuit court judge in Michigan, too. And he was son to the bank president. Yes. Was it MacPhail? No. MacPhail, you see, was the man that got my sister to go up there. Oh, I see. And she married the cashier of his bank up there. Townsend's her name was. And I was going to say that– you know who MacPhail was? I've written in there, MacPhail, his son, is president of the American League of Baseball. Baseball, yes. I would love to meet him. If I could only see him sometime, it would be interesting, wouldn't it? You had something to tell him from the beginning. But when your parents not let you go to Chicago alone, weren't they scared of–? Oh, they didn't want me to go at all. But as I say, mother was very ill. And, you know, she just, as I say, had to take things as they came because she wasn't well. But as I say, they were very distressed. But then you met your husband. Yeah, my husband. David Johnson. David Johnson. And he was a Swede. And how. So when you were brought back to your mother, then that probably put some balsam on her. Oh, yeah. You know, going away from– That's right. So that we– but– So you married then in the Baptist Church? Uh-huh. In Englewood or–? No, no. No, in Ravenswood, Chicago. Ravenswood. Uh-huh. On the north side. What kind of work was he doing? He was a painter and decorator. I see. All of these houses, we lived there. We first moved here. We built a house on Roland Avenue over here. And he built– this was all cornfields. And he used to paint all those new houses on Guilford Road here. He used to do painting and up there, all of them. So you moved there because you had your two brothers there? Yes. Well, yes, because the painting in Chicago that my husband was in, I think he fell or something, and one shoulder bothered him. And so, you know, it was always three, four stories in Chicago. You had to do how that was. On the north shoulder up there, too. So we decided that my brother said, Oh, come to Rockford. Was it in the 40s or after the war? 1950. 1950. Uh-huh. Uh-huh. So then you moved in. Uh-huh. And how many children did you have now? I just had one son. One son. Uh-huh. And he's in Rockford or–? He lives in Cherry Valley. He works for McKiskey Lewis. He's quite a salesman. He's been high man for long. Been in the Million Dollar Club for many years and got a gold pendant for outstanding– And that company he works for is that–? McKiskey Lewis. Big company here. What kind of manufacturing? Real estate. Real estate, I see. Yeah, yeah. So there it is. You have the whole family in one place and one sister in Grand Rapids. But my brothers are gone, of course. So it's just my sister and I. As I say, I'm going up there now week after next. Two. I'm telling you my whole life story. You're going to the Tulip Festival. There must be– Well, no. Was it last week? No, it's starting on the 7th. Of May? Of May. But the trouble is that my son is so busy that he can't hardly get away. So we're only going for a couple of days. So you're keeping busy anyway. Oh, yeah. With the little rides and everything in between. Oh, sure. And I was out on the motorcycle, too, riding. Well, you did. And you still drive, I suppose. Oh, yeah. Uh-huh. Still drive. I have my car out there. So how long have you been here at Peter Peter's? I've been here 18 years. This is a lovely home. Yes, of course, this is newer here, you see. I was in the old place, you see. And when I first came there, they wanted me to start a band or some music. So I had a rhythm band. Here, at Peter Peter's? Yeah, in the old place. You know where that is. And before this was built. You see, this is just eight years old, this building. And so we sang all places here in Rockford. Are you still active then with singing? Oh, I tell you, I have no place. If I had a piano, if I had a bigger place where I could continue. But when you don't use your voice, you lose it. You know that very well. So that's why you have to... But now, I do sing whenever they have any singing here, you know what I mean. But I can't do anything like I should do, you know. So there's a strength for you then, too. Yeah, it isn't. You're in shape. Yes, I never would be able to get, I don't think, in shape again at my age. Because, you know, it takes a lot of strength to put on these, like all these arias that I used to do in oratorios, you know, and sing. When I think of what I used to do. But I love the directing. Oh, I just love to direct choirs. Was it unusual, though, at that time for women to direct a choir? Wasn't that a man's job? Well, maybe. How did you break into that? Well, I don't... See, that's my choir. In Rennieswood? No, at the Temple Baptist here in Rockford. Oh, in Rockford. Look at the size of it there I had. Well, I think we were something like 48. So you directed there for many years there also then in Rockford? Oh, yes. Uh-huh. Oh, yes. I directed many. And I had orchestra, and I had little ones. I could get them to sing like everything, you know. And then I'd have the junior choirs. Then I had the GMG that we used to open up our Christmas program every first Sunday, every December. And I'd have what they call the Girls' Missionary Guild, they called it, GMGs. And I used to have almost 80 children in that choir loft because they could sit close together, you know. And then I'd have the organ taken away. I used to start in July and plan the program for Christmas and change things, you know, to fit the children. I'd have the organ taken away from the piano. It was just one continuous. Sometimes I had four violins in front of me. Sometimes I had horns. It depended what I had. I had that for five or six years that I did that. Is there any particular song that the old Swedish people like to hear over the years that you remember of? Well, of course, I think one of the favorites was, oh, what's the name of it? It happened to be so I can't remember. Of course, here, I'd say it's mostly Lutherans here, you see, in this home. It's owned by the Lutherans. And of course, Rockford is more Lutheran than anything else. But the singing, now, doesn't that bring over a mutual understanding to like even others? The Lutherans, they like the Salvation Army, and I think they like the free church music, too, because it's a little bit... Well, they're getting to be more that way. For instance, now, we have a chaplain here, Moline, Reverend Moline. He's retired. Yes, Reverend Moline. And he's such a grand person, you know. He is open-minded. Yes, such a grand person. And it's a funny thing. When I play for the, when they have gatherings or something in the atrium, when they want me to play, when I play, well, he always likes to, I shouldn't be saying this, am I right, but he likes to have me play because you put some life to it, see? And I tell you, it's only what the Lord gave me. Because sometimes I play, and I don't know really how it comes. It just comes. Nowadays, I suppose, it has shifted over to all kinds of different, a lot of noise even in the churches, I mean, the music. How do you like the new trend of music and singing in church? Well, I tend to... Like the free church, they go in for a lot of singing. They have almost like a violin music. Oh, yeah, I was just there for the celebration. How do you take their music? Does it sound good to your ears? Well, of course, I was going to say that I'm a little bit too much of the old school, see? Just a little bit too much of the old school. I don't say that it's wrong or anything like that, you know, but it just seems as if that I remember when I retired from the choir that I had here, why the music was beginning to change altogether. It was going to be... And I went over to the Hope Publishing Company in Wheaton. Well, it wasn't at Wheaton. It was at Kevill Stream, which is a suburb of Wheaton. And I talked to the head man there, you know, because I asked him about... Well, I was looking for music, you know, and so forth. But he says, well, we've got to satisfy the young people. Was that what he said? That's what he said. He says that the trend is that the young people enjoy this other... Yeah, but how about the older ones? Should they suffer then? Yeah. Well, I suppose they thought we'd have to come along. They were safe members in the church anyhow. They weren't afraid to lose the young ones. But, you know, like I hear the Lutherans, they always say they love the music of the Salvation Army because it's an easy rhythm. Yeah, that's right. Because the Lutherans have always been stiff. Yeah, that's why. You as a performer now, I mean, over the years, how do you see the Lutheran hymnals? Are they a little bit too much? Well, to me, they're coming towards the other direction. It seems so. But, you know, now in our church, we have all kinds of young couples and young people we have and all that. But you don't see that too much in some of the other Lutheran churches, I tell you. So they still have a way to go to bridge the gap. It just seems as if it's, of course, maybe I'm talking out of turn, but that's the way I understand it. I have quite a few people from the Lutheran churches, of course, that have transferred over to our church and pre-church and all different churches. But as I say, who am I to say? But you as a performer now, I mean, over the years, you have seen the different trends. Oh, yes. The young people seem to direct it. When you were young, for instance, you couldn't tell your parents, I don't like the music in our church. I'd like to have it my way. In other words, you have to sit there and listen to it. But nowadays they don't do that to young people. They demand. Yeah, that's right. Is it because of all this instrumentation, electronics and everything they can put in a whole orchestra right in this small box now? Oh, yes. I tell you, the times are changing. So just think of this, computers. Oh, my goodness. I only wish that I was younger and then, in a way, I'm glad I'm as old as I am. But if I was younger, I wouldn't be able to take up this computer business, you know, because I would love to do that because it really is something. In fact, look at how the government is. You see? They're beginning to use that computer and they get stuff that people don't. You know what I mean. They can find out things that... That's right. The first thing you know, they... They know too much. That's right. That's right.