 Now this is cassette two, side one, continuation with Mrs. Louise Baumann, Omaha, Nebraska, cassette two, side one. You were growing up now in a family of one Swede and your mother's name Irene Petar. A French background. Straight French. There was no mixing with any Germans or English. The name is French. Her father was half French and half Irish. Her mother was Pennsylvania Dutch from German. The name Petar comes from the French part. Right. How did that affect you? When did you know that you had some Swedish background? I always knew I had Swedish background. My mother, being such a mixture I think, had no particular tradition in her family of any one thing. Whereas my dad, having been born to immigrant parents and lived with them and been with the grandparents, had a very strong Swedish tradition. And this was really the one that we followed in the home, particularly at Christmas time of course. We always had the rather traditional Swedish Christmas Eve celebration. Very little on Christmas Day except to go to church. Christmas Eve was the family gathering time. We had lutefisk. We had potatiskorf and brunaboner and a few other of the Swedish sell, etc. And rice pudding, lingonberries, Christmas cookies. And our packages under the tree were all done on Christmas Eve. How did your mother absorb all this stuff? Because it was completely foreign to her. It was, but I remember one time she said that she decided she'd married a Swede, she might as well be one. And like I said, there was no strong tradition of one kind or another in her background, so it was easy for her to enjoy this. And my mother also said that she really thought she learned more about good cooking from the Swedish mother-in-law than she had learned from her own mother. Was she often in your home then, your grandmother? Not when I was a child. She had moved to California by then, but in the early years of my parents' marriage, the in-laws were all in Omaha. And they were close to the Swedish, she was close to her Swedish in-laws. My parents were married in 1912, and her father-in-law, my farfar, died in 1918. Did you call him farfar? No, he was dead before I was born. So that was never mentioned? No, no. But I knew the expression from someplace, I suppose it had to have come from either friends who called their grandfather that, or I don't know where. But really, we didn't refer to the grandparents as farfar or farmore. But after my grandfather died in 1918, my grandmother then moved to California in about 1919 and lived with a maiden daughter there. That was three years before you were born? That was before I was born also. But she did make any number of trips back to Nebraska, so I did know her. And looking back on it, I also realized that she did speak with some Swedish accent. I didn't really at the time think about it being a Swedish accent, but it was. And is there something specific you remember about her? Did she tell you something, or stories? No, I really don't. A couple of times I know she came at Christmas, which made it a very festive Christmas. And she did stay at our house when she came. And that was a funny thing too, because looking back on it, our household consisted of we three girls, my two sisters and I, and my parents, and then for 11 years a sister of my mother's lived with us. But when relatives came, they always stayed at our house. I had the uncle who was in business with my father, had a wife, no children. They had a maid who lived in. They had a big house, but the relatives never stayed there. They always stayed at our house. So they've had more comfortable days with you then? I don't know whether it was because my father was the oldest child. Looking back on it, I have a feeling that perhaps when the father of the family died, that my dad as the eldest son then became nominal head of the family, which he was. The other brothers and sisters all, I think, rather recognized this. So they, like you said, recognized his opinions. Yeah, yeah. And of course, he and the next brother, who was just two years younger, were in business all their lives together. They took over the father's monument business when he died. They had both worked there. They just continued it when he... It was a big business. Was he able to spend time with you and I as a child? Oh yeah, very much. Did he do something specific that you... Yeah, he was very family oriented. I think he would very much like to have had a son, but he had three daughters. But he did spend a lot of time with the family. He was, I think, very much a man's man, however, in the sense that he was a hunter, he was a fisherman. He went on hunting trips every fall. He went on fishing trips sometimes, but we also had family vacations. In the early years when I was growing up, in the 1920s, times were fairly good. We did take vacation trips, but we also lived in the old Carter Lake Club in the Omaha area, which was on a lake, which had a beach, a bathhouse, a picnic house, a bowling alley, a dance hall, tennis courts. You must have been swimming then. Yeah, we swam in it. Oh yeah, yeah. There was a lot of activity. There were always boats around, rowboats. My sisters and I had a canoe. A lot of the boys had sailboats. There was always activity, ice skating in the winter, sledding on the lake or whatever. Always active. Always very. Was he playing games with you? He did, oh yeah. And he went ice skating with us, which my mother didn't do, but Dad did. And pulled us around on the sled in the winter. And in the summer, we had a lot of picnics in the summer and into the fall of the year. It was a very family-oriented existence, really. Dad played cards with us, taught us card games and how to play checkers and things like that. So that, yeah, he spent a lot of time with the family. They worked six days a week. He did not work on Sundays, but he was always home for dinner in the evening. He did not do a lot of traveling in the job. They did have employees representing the company out in Iowa and Nebraska, Kansas, on occasion into Colorado or whatever. But he didn't really do a lot of traveling. A little bit, but not a lot. There was no business phone calls at home at that time? Not too much in the evening. We occasionally had business acquaintances would be there for dinner time or something like that when they were in town. But he was active in business, in the business community in Omaha. He was active, always was active in things like rotary. Well, he was quite active in rotary at one time, was president. He belonged to the Elks, Masonic organization, Noonday Club, things like that, which he did do a lot. He didn't belong to Vasa or Viking? No, he did not belong to Vasa or Viking. In fact, as I was growing up, I didn't even know there was such a thing as Vasa or Viking. The family, whether it was because my mother wasn't Swedish or what, I do not know. But I do remember the old Swedish auditorium. So I must have been there at some time or other. But basically, he did not participate in the Swedish groups other than Noonday Club. He was not a stockholder then of the Swedish auditorium? Not so far as I know. My grandfather might have been. I don't know. I don't know. And then he fought you on his knee and... Oh, yes. Yeah, but I don't remember him saying the words. No, no. But he did ride us on his leg like that, you know. Which we... All three of you? Yeah, not all at once. One at a time. Break his leg. Yeah, we thought that was great fun. And I always used to wonder how come nobody else's daddy in the neighborhood did that when it was so much fun. And of course, looking back on it, I realized we were the only Swedes. The rest of them were not Swedish. So you can't remember anybody else was having a... No, no, no. Did any of you girls go with him out hunting and fishing? No, not usually. I remember one time I went pheasant hunting with him and we didn't see a bird all day and I didn't really care whether I went again or not. It wasn't all that much fun. No, he... Actually the fishing was off with... he had a fishing friend of his and they... On Missouri? Well, he didn't fish so much on the Missouri. They usually went to lakes up in Minnesota and would stay a weekend or four days or whatever. They went off to Iowa then? Yeah, they would drive. Yeah. But he hunted every... Well, he would go out and hunt pheasants on a day trip or maybe up for a couple of days up in Northeast Nebraska. But he would go every fall... He and a friend had a riverboat, a scull boat, and they would go up river near Sioux City and put in the river up there and then spend a couple of weeks or so floating downstream hunting ducks, duck hunting. This was before the days of limits. And then they would pull in at a farm just north of Omaha where they had a friend who lived there. To stay overnight? Well, no, they'd pull in there at the end of the hunting trip, dock there, and then bring the boat and the birds back home and everybody would get busy plucking the birds, which I hated. There was no freezer at that time, though. How did you... No, I don't know how they... Did they hung them up or...? I don't know how they kept them after they killed them when they were on the river, whether they had an ice chest. I really don't know. All I remember is they would appear at home and everybody would get busy plucking. Yeah. So did he have business friends with him then on the East Coast? No, usually... Well, the duck hunting on the river was done with just an acquaintance, a good friend of the family. And sometimes to go pheasant hunting, he would go up and one of the men who represented the company... Nebraska is real good pheasant hunting around on the farm areas. And he would go out with one of those men usually. He didn't do any quail hunting up in the Sandhills or...? No quail hunting, just pheasants and ducks, yeah. And he didn't go after deer or any of the big game. So... but he had the big offices that carried a lot of workers and salesmen and... Yeah. What they did... My uncle managed the plant, took care of the production end of it. It was all divided up then. Yeah. And Dad did... was in charge of the office. And then they did have a third man, Martin Swery, who worked there, who did the books and took care of the financial part of it. Dad did a lot of dealing with the sales representatives. He did sales work in Omaha. He did a lot of the... Well, in those days in Omaha, it wasn't such a big city and belonging to things such as Rotary or Masonic groups was a business contact PR work, which he did very well. So the participation at those big gatherings were very high and in other words, people came to those? Oh yeah, oh yeah. Like I said, Omaha was not such a big city in those days and the people with whom you associated in those kind of groups were also other businessmen. Most of our family friends were from the business, a lot of them small business owners like ourselves. So but then the auto estate, the salesmen took care of that contact? Yeah, yeah. Travelling around and... Frequently, the salesmen, they were not always full-time monument salesmen. Perhaps they were the local undertaker. Traditionally, frequently the furniture maker who also built caskets would also, in the olden days, would also sell monuments. Yeah, because there's not enough furniture business in a small community to support a family. So they would take on sidelines. And what year did you marry, the 1940? I was married in 1942 and I had met my husband at college. Here in Omaha? No, in Crete, Nebraska at Dome College. He was born and raised in Norfolk. So he became an Omaha after he was married then? Yeah, well he was a Navy pilot during the war and he had gone into service in June or July of 1941. So he was off during the whole time? Yeah, and then he got out at the end of the war. He was in for more than four years. So he was overseas then in the Pacific? He spent one winter on duty at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba and then he had a stateside tour of duty and then he was out in the Pacific. He flew seaplanes, anti-submarine patrol planes. He was a pilot? He was a pilot and during the early part of the war when the Nazi U-boats were in the Atlantic area he was stationed in Cuba. And then later on when that quieted down he was out in the Pacific at the islands of Saipan and Palau. So that's why one of your sons then became a pilot? No, I don't know, that may have had something to do with one of the boys being interested in it. Is he still interested in aviation and flying? My husband? Yes. Well, yeah, he's interested but he really has not flown basically since the war. So there was no hobby after the war? No, he didn't really have time. He did stay in the Naval Reserve for a while but they had to go down to Olathe, Kansas and spend weekends and he was busy with job and family and it just didn't work out real well for him to do that. Which was all right because about a month after he dropped out the squadron went to Korea. So he was better off to stay away from those doings. Yeah, he'd been through one war. That's right. So but you also have wandered into the hobby of finding the roots of your family. It was easy for you though because you had no problems to know whereabouts where they came from in Sweden. No because basically I think I had always been interested in it and Dad knew a lot about where his parents had come from. Did he talk often about it? I don't know that he talked often about it but he did know where they both had come from and he was not hesitant to talk about it. You know I've heard so many people say that they just the parents would not talk about it but that was not the case and I did know the parish from which both my grandparents had come. Dad's sister Inez had gone over there and lived for a year when she retired at 65. This was in about 1954. This is one of your sisters? This is one of my dad's sisters. My father's sister Inez and she visited some of the relatives over there then. The family had always known where these people were on their father's side only. Now on the mother's side my father's Morfar was the only surviving child in his family and that I have substantiated in church records. So he left no relatives, close relatives behind. His wife had been orphaned at a rather young age and the children had been dispersed to a number of different families and were no longer close evidently and so she was apparently fairly much alone when she came to America. Although I have found that she did have one sister who came to America and I have not as yet been able to find out for sure what happened to that sister who was married in Sweden and had a family before she came to America then. But my Farfar came to an older half-brother in Burlington. I think we talked some about that. And that is the family that we had always known and then my grandfather's youngest sister Carolina Sophia came and lived with my dad's family when she came and also an aunt of my father's came and lived with them when she first came to America. And this is, it's the family of that aunt that I still see when I go over there. My second cousin Egron who has been very helpful to me in meeting relatives, tracking down the modern day part of the family, of his part of it. He does not know all of the others of course either. But the ones that are leaving today, he can help you though? Well all of his mother's family and she was one of eight children so there is a large group of that family still. You have three girls now in the family? Yeah. And the other two, are they also interested in the roots like you have been? Very little. You're the youngest though? No I'm the middle. Oh you're in the middle. I'm in the middle. My oldest sister who lives in Salt Lake City married a Salt Lake City man, doesn't happen to be Mormon however, but he was a railroad man and he was born and raised in Salt Lake. But they have no children and she is quite disinterested in it. When I put material together she will read it but that's about the extent of it and I cannot get her to go to the Mormon library and get information for me. I did discover that this Carolina Sophia died in Salt Lake in 1939 and I did ask her to go get the obituary and the death certificate copy and what not. And about three months later I did get that information from her. But basically she won't do anything of that. My younger sister is somewhat interested but not enough to really do very much about it. She's willing to help me with something if she can but she doesn't know how. But now she has four children and she does want the information to be passed on to them. So I think when you have children perhaps makes a difference in your interest in it too. I can remember this oldest sister, I always assumed that being four years older than I, she would know more from the grandmothers because we never knew our grandfathers. But did she ask? No she didn't know as much as I did. And I can remember, I guess basically I've always been interested in it, really. Will she understand all the work that's behind all those names and places and strange names? I don't think she really has an understanding of what's behind, no. And I have put together a rather complete record of my grandfather's side of the family because I have had Igron's help with the modern and I have gone back in the church records myself. And I have had some help with that from a Swedish man also. But she's vaguely interested only and she doesn't really know what's gone into it, no. So what year did you start looking into those strange names? I started doing genealogy about thirty years ago. But I did not start really getting into the Swedish until about, oh maybe twelve to fifteen years ago. I guess basically because I always had known the name of the parish and I knew I could find it. But I think I partly got interested in it because Roger, our eldest son, was living over there and he had seen some of the relatives. He had met some of them when he was there. He was eighteen years old I think when he was there with my Aunt Inez in Sweden. In the sixties? In the sixties, yeah. That was in the summer of, must have been the summer of sixty-two that Aunt Inez took some of the younger generation to Sweden with her for seven weeks. And I was into genealogy anyway by then and I was ready to start in on the Swedish and I got going on it. And then when Roger moved back to the states and ended up in Omaha, we met one night a week out at the Mormon library and worked together on the Swedish records. And it was helpful. He could not read the old writing, which I could fairly well decipher, but if I could write it, he could do the translating for the most part for me. So was it late sixties or early seventies then? He came back to Omaha in about seventy-seven maybe. Seventy-six. So then they had the records. Somewhere along in there, yeah. So you went into the Swedish records then? Yeah. Were they able to help you and guide you, what's in the order and so forth? At the Mormon library here? There was one, happened to be a friend of mine out there who had done some Swedish research, but basically at that time there weren't that many people around to help me. I knew genealogical methods by that time, but as far as becoming acquainted and learning to use to good advantage the Swedish records, there was not a whole lot of help available to me. And I got very frustrated because I could not read the language. And it was at that time that I decided, well let's see, I guess it was eighty-two when I first went over to Sweden and started really studying Swedish. I had worked a little bit at the Scandinavian American Club when Ola Holmberg was teaching a little conversational class, which was enough to kind of give me a little bit of a start and really get me interested in it. And I did go over in eighty-two and again in eighty-four and eighty-seven and take language classes over there. I'm certainly by no means proficient in Swedish, but it has been of tremendous value in reading the genealogical records. I get a lot more out of it. I think I miss less. You know, when you're not familiar with the language at all, it's awfully easy to miss something. And also, of course, the more you work with the records, the greater your familiarity. You know better what to look for also. It has not been particularly easy to learn, really, to read the old Swedish. But it's been a challenge and I've enjoyed it. Is the hardest part to find a specific place where they lived in the church records before you get the hang of that? Or what is the hardest for you to do? For an American who wants to do their genealogy from Sweden, you can't do anything until you know the name of the parish, of course. You know the parish. I mean, then the specific place in the parish. Oh. Or to find it in the membership book. Oh, no. What I did, when I first started in, I knew the name of the parish and I had a birth date. And I looked in the birth record and got the name of the farm. So then when I... That's the way how you started out. Yeah. I did have sense enough to do that. Otherwise, and I have had occasions in the research where the priest would neglect to write, he'd cross their name off, but he wouldn't write in the column where they moved to. So I would have to get a film. I would assume in those cases that they were in the same parish. But I would have to read, just start and read the whole reel of film until I found them again. So by that time you had the birth date. Yeah. And the year. Yeah. And the first names. Yeah. Yeah. Well, I knew that my grandfather's real name was not Bloom, that it was Nilsson. My father, you see, knew this. Had I not known that, it would have taken me a lot longer to get back into the Kristalla Parish records. But because I knew that and because I also knew that he had come to his older half-brother in Burlington and taken on the army name from the half-brother, I had the basic information that I needed to make it easy. So I was able to go quickly from one step back to the next step. Yeah. And with my grandmother, I knew that he was Anders Fredrik Andersson and his wife was Carolina Lovisa Sundqvist. So I had, and I knew the parish of their birth, so that was easy. So Sundqvist was quite a bit easier than Andersson. Yeah. Very much. Very much. So how did you find out this Swedish? If we start with Grebbystorfer, you are coming in there as an objective observer and sitting down there in the lessons, with the lessons. How do they approach it? How do they approach the teaching? Yes. Is it something that you are satisfied with or what kind of? I was very satisfied with it. The class I took in Swedish I, which was first year college Swedish, was sponsored by North Park College and Raymond Jarve was the teacher. At Suttervett, yeah, in Jönköping. And he was an excellent Swedish teacher. Start with the alphabet and step one, you know, and go on from there. I think that for an English speaking person like myself who never really heard Swedish spoken because it wasn't spoken in the home. I heard a few Swedish expressions. I would ask my dad to say things, but I didn't know any Swedish and certainly did not have any understanding of the grammar or any of the structure of the language. I think Swedish is a fairly difficult language for an English speaking person to learn in a five week period, particularly because you just can't absorb that fast. You can't remember that much vocabulary every day, every day, and every day. I took Swedish II in Grevestad two years later and in the intervening time I had not used it basically. It was difficult. And then I repeated Swedish II in 87 and it went much better. I think for me it was the right thing to do. And I benefited greatly by it. I think I have a much better grasp of it. I think my speaking ability is better. My understanding is much better. How about the rest of your students? Were they advanced a little bit more? The makeup of the group in both the class sponsored by North Park and the one... The interview with Louise Bowman continues next slide. Next slide. In both cases in the classes I attended, the makeup of the class was almost entirely those who had some Swedish in their background. There was the occasional college student who was taking the class as a language requirement to fulfill a language requirement. But even most of the regular college students from North Park and Augustana, of course, tend to be of some Swedish background anyway. Of the adults in the group, if not both spouses, always one of them came from a fairly strong Swedish background and the other spouse came along for the ride or to learn whatever they could learn or to enjoy the trip and participate in the class. But it was very interesting to me because I found that the people who came from a strong Swedish background and grew up speaking Swedish did tend to speak as their grandparents had spoken the language. They had no idea of the grammar at all, of how the language was put together, of sentence structure. They couldn't spell anything, of course. For some of them it was almost as difficult as it was for me. The difference being that they didn't have to learn as much vocabulary because they already knew the words. But as far as the grammatical construction was concerned and word order within a sentence and all that, they had a lot to learn too and it was not always that easy for anybody. Did they stress the grammar point and spelling? Well, yeah, they did because, of course, when I was taking first year Swedish, that's part of it. In second year Swedish, that's part of it too. And it takes two years of college work to get through the grammar and on into the fine points of the grammar, which frankly don't interest me all that much. I have what I need out of it. And were I younger and thought I might go to Sweden and really need that for some reason or other, I would probably be more interested in really sitting down and seeing to it that I did learn it. I am able to express myself fairly well. I don't say it correctly, but I don't care if people laugh at me. That doesn't bother me. I am able to converse quite a bit with the relatives and make myself understood. And if they speak slowly and don't use too many big words, I can, you know, I know what they're saying. How did, generally speaking now, how did the course go at the beginning to find the, what kind of assistance did you get? Be consequent, as we say in Swedish, because they don't teach people, you know. It was an interesting class. I think I had done more genealogical research probably than most of the others who were in the class. Well, there were a couple of them there. There was a fellow from New Jersey who had really done a lot, whose both parents came, I think, from Sweden, and he really was conversant with it. There were a couple of others who had done a fair amount. There were also those who, well, there was an older lady, 89, and her two brothers in their 80s. All they knew was the village that their grandmother had come from. And before the class was over, they had gotten sufficient help that they could go to that village and find the place. They had, one of the Swedish men went with them, but, I mean, they had discovered enough that they were able to accomplish that. But you had gone into the church records already. You were interested in land records. And more sophisticated, the Rye v. Miller. I was interested, well, I was not so much interested in land records because I knew that my people never owned any land. I was interested in the military records. There was some confusion over that. Nils William was not real sure where those military records were because in the Comar Regiment records are in Stockholm or they are in Jönköping. Nobody seemed to know for sure. In Jönköping, they told me they were in Stockholm. Nils William said they were in Jönköping, so on and so forth. Well, I finally did track some of them down, but not all of them. In Jönköping? No, they were in Stockholm. War archives, I think so. Yeah, yeah. But I did not track them all down because by then the time had run out and I was not able to do it. But you saw some of it anyway. They were not easy to read, I suppose. Absolutely not. Probably the most interesting thing I found was a probate, a book technique from 1791 which was comparable to the type of records we had here in that period of time. But it was very difficult reading and I did have to have a Swedish man help translate that. And he said it was not very good Swedish. So I said, well, if he thought it wasn't very good, no wonder I couldn't translate it. But there was not so much Latin used there as in the church records, though. I personally have run into almost no Latin used in the church records. It was all old Swedish. It was Kristalla and Mörlinde, right? It was Kristalla and Mörlinde and also Udensvinnlofta on the east coast. I just haven't seen it in Latin. An occasional word in Latin, a church record. For some sickness. Yeah, something of that nature. So they are fairly good then. You didn't have any blockage somewhere where you had to... No, actually, the records I have from those four parishes are the ones that I have actually used extensively. They've all been very good, very good. And they're all... I think there's only one, Hristofer Hirsling, that is missing. One segment of ten years is missing. When you were saying that research, you know, being in the different classes, is there something that you could make better? Be more practical approach to it, for instance, because, you know, there's nothing better than the student, he knows more about the problem than the teacher, of course. I don't know how you can make it better. I have done quite a lot of teaching Swedish genealogical research as a result of my studying it. And I think every parish priest is a little different from every other parish priest. Every individual's genealogical background is unique. Every person is going to run into something different. I don't know of any particular way that it could be made better. When I do the teaching, I concentrate on handwriting, on how the records are kept, the system of the record keeping that exists. I do tell them that there are some differences in the records in Dalarna, but I don't try to explain it to them. If they have Dalarna forbearers, they're going to have to go figure that out for themselves with help. I don't really know of any way. I think it would be an absolutely marvelous thing if the system of records at the Immigrant Institute in Vekhu could be simplified somehow. The turning in of a request slip and waiting while somebody runs down to the basement to find the reel and waiting for them to get back up with it is the pits. Terribly inefficient. My assumption is that they are stored in the basement for climactic storage reasons. Of course, the reading room during the busy season at Vekhu is not nearly big enough. It's sufficient. The reading room itself. I don't know if the reading room were put down in the basement where the archives are. It might be helpful. I think that the staff at the Immigrant Institute is as helpful as they can be with what they have to work with. They are understaffed, which is too bad. However, I have also been in the archives in Yotobori, for instance, where it was not the most efficient system on earth either. I think the use of a copy machine. You mean printout? Printout, yeah. Like a Xerox copier, would be an absolute blessing. I like the copy machine microfilm reader at the Swenson Center where you push the button and your copy comes out the top of the machine. I know those are expensive, but nevertheless, they are a real godsend to the genealogical researcher. Saving a lot of time. I have done, I think one time I felt that in about a day and a half I did probably ten days research at the Swenson Center simply because of that machine. But there again, having done enough research, when I look at a record, I know what I'm looking at and when I see the name, I know that that's what I want, I get the copy and spend my time later reading it. I don't figure out right then and there what it is because I can pretty much tell just by a glance. So you know, there's nothing like working with those records and familiarizing yourself with them. So, do they know in Sweden that the places you've been, Vetterbygden, they didn't have any material to show you at all? Oh no, not at the school, you had to go to the library in Nynterbygden. But I wasn't taking, yeah, you had to go down to the... It was only Swedish at Vetterbygden, you didn't take any genealogy. The genealogy class was headquartered at Jönköping also. Yes. Yeah, because Nils William was, yeah, because Nils William sponsored it, it was held at Jönköping. And he was going to solve all the questions for you. But you had to go to the Jönköping library to do any research and of course, typically... To the city library. To the city library. You didn't go to the archives there in Jönköping. There aren't any archives in Jönköping. In Jönköping? They're at Vads... Yeah, but the war archives, don't they have a city library? Well, yeah, but I don't know how to explain it. It's not all that great. No, but they have an archive there though. They do have. I thought you had some... I didn't really get any help at the war archives in Jönköping. The people at the library there are very willing to be helpful, however. But the microfilm that they have, typically of the other counties in Sweden, particularly covers their own county. Yeah, Jönköping. Yeah, now you can get the others on interlibrary loan, but it takes a couple of weeks. And if somebody else has checked them out, they're not available. If you go to that library and somebody has taken... The natives can check those films out like a book for 30 days. If you go in there and somebody has them at their house for 30 days and you're there for a week, it's too bad. You don't get to look at them. Well, they should have extra copies, but it's too expensive. Well, sure, sure. And I've been in any number of county libraries in Sweden, and the facilities range from barely adequate to absolutely marvelous. Some of them have only a very basic microfilm reader, for example, and maybe no copy facility at all. Others will have two or three marvelous microfilm readers and a copy machine available. So you know, it varies. It's just like here. Well, the library should actually have a copy for their visitors, because if they have taken the trouble to drive long distance, for instance... But it's expensive. It's expensive. But then the one that borrows the film home, he should pay an extra fee not to keep paying for an extra set of copies. I think it should be... Well, it would be nice if they had some such system. It's nice that somebody can take it home for 30 days and use it half an hour. Well, sure. It's a ridiculous system. Sure, yeah. This is true. But I did learn one thing that was very helpful. If you want to know in a community who the best genealogist in town is, go ask the librarian, because they know who's working on those films, and they know who knows the most about those films. So that's a real good way to approach the problem. But there again, you need to have a knowledge of the language. Most people in a library can speak some English, but you can't rely on that. And if their English really isn't much better than my Swedish, it can get interesting. Oh, you don't know if they can catch all of it with what you're trying to explain. That's right. That's absolutely right. Misunderstandings are very easy. And then going down in the basement and pick up something, it usually takes time. It does take time. It's a long way up. Yeah, that's right. And I feel sorry for those people who have to run up and down stairs all day long at the Immigrant Institute. They're probably tired when the day's over. Good exercise. But it's very interesting to go over there and do the research. But it's a lot more practical to do it at your local branch Mormon genealogical library on microfilm. To get the beginning for it. The time is too valuable to spend looking for it. Yeah, yeah. And actually, when you go over there to do it, you are reliant upon the presence of somebody who can get the material. You're reliant upon the material being there. If you want to see the actual church record, is it held at the church? Is it at the archives in Vatnstena or Veksu or wherever? Or is it at the original church? Well, before 1910, it was usually at the archives now. Yeah. But the current records, you know, to 1910 and up. Yeah. But you have to go through, but probably one gave it all to you, though. Well, see, this is the catch. They have a privacy law, the same as we do. And so, and you're reliant upon, if those records are at the minister's, is the minister at home and is he willing to give you the time? And then you've got two hours. Those records are too hard to read. You need to do your work at home before you go. And then fill in over there. But in your case, you have the relation here that helped you. On my father. Present. Yes, on the present generation. Yes. Now, he, of course, he knows all these people, so it's not hard for him. So he knows what he's looking for. Right. However, he did make the remark. I think he looked at some of the church records on his own family, cousins and so on and so forth, which I assume is permissible. But he said that the local priest in Karlstorp was complaining about all these people bothering him wanting to look at church records. And I said, well, my gosh, Ygrant, are there that many Americans coming to Karlstorp? And he said, no, the Swedes are wanting to do it. The Swedish people themselves. And of course, I think more and more Swedish people are trying to find out what happened to those relatives that disappeared into the U.S. somewhere, too. And they do not understand that our records do not permit one to follow a person through the priest's records. There's no record when you move from one place to another. No, only when they're... If they're a Swedish-American, of course, it's easier. The early Swedish-American church records were the same as the Swedish church records, yes. That you can follow. It's quite easy. But I think a lot of those Swedes, once they discovered that they did not have to have a permit from the pastor to go to another church... Well, they just had to leave. They just left. If they wanted to disappear, it was very easy. Sure. They were on the route. And especially a single person, very seldom joined the church. Because there was no money the first couple of years. Sure. They didn't have the pastor to do it. Oh, yes. Well, I found one of my family was read out of the church, excommunicated for non-payment of his obligation to the church. On this side of the ocean here in... Yeah. In America. Oh, yeah. He was dismissed. And it is so noted in Swedish by the priest. Dismissed for membership for non-payment of his obligation to the congregation. Which congregation was that? I don't... I'm not sure which one that was. Burlington, Staten Island? This was in Burlington. Probably was Messiah Lutheran. Oh, they had good records. In Burlington. That's the most likely one. Yeah, there's the Messiah Lutheran. Yeah. Yeah. If you can get a look in there. But you see, I didn't know which church in Burlington to start looking in either. I went through quite a few church records before I found the Messiah Lutheran. Which I did at Swenson Center. So that's a big puzzle, but you have it solved now. Well, for the most part. All you have to do is not to go back to the church or whatever it is. Yeah. Whatever it takes. But that's a lot of hours. Oh, yeah. Yeah. And it's like any other hobby, you know. But the mistakes will be fewer now because you know, you're washing yourself. I hope so. No guarantees. Not to go around the porridge, so to speak. Nope. Nope. So you had experience then with Grebbestad and Vätterbygden. And Swedish housekeeping. And Swedish housekeeping, absolutely right. A lot of boiled eggs in the morning. Yep. Lots of boiled eggs in the morning. Very good food overall. I thoroughly enjoyed the Swedish, the exposure. But the system of closing down Sweden in July, though, is not too much to recommend. The system of closing down Sweden in July is something that Americans simply do not understand. A lot of Americans, I think, go over there during the month of July and think that they will find Swedish records or whatever. And yeah, there may be somebody around on Tuesday morning from 10 till 12, but that's about it. Have you spent most of the time over there in the month of July? No, not actually. I would say, actually, I've probably spent most of it in the month of June. Some into July, some in August. Do you feel that the people are more, less helpful in the end of June or more helpful? Because they're getting into the vacation by then. Well, gosh, I really don't know. I really don't know. But I know that in the month of July, it's very difficult. And especially about eating places, of course. Oh, eating places, yeah. And also, I think Americans don't understand that there's nothing open on Saturdays in the summer either, that everybody's out at the stuga or out on the sailboat or, yeah, on weekends besides the month of July. And that goes even in August. Yeah, yeah. It's the crawfish season. Kräftorna. Yep. So you have been celebrating some of the Swedish holidays then together with your relation over there, like the crawfish party? Yeah, that we have done. I have not been with the family at Midsommar. I have been with friends up in Dalarna or with school groups at Midsommar's time. No Christmas? No, I have never been there for Christmas. I think it would be a very nice experience. I have carried on the Swedish traditions in my own family because my husband was in business with my father. He got in on all the Swedish thing too. He became a Swedish. Well, he's pretty thoroughly German, pretty thoroughly German. But he enjoys the Swedish Christmas thing. His family never had any great Christmas traditions. And it was not hard for him to fall into the Swedish tradition at Christmas too. But my children don't particularly carry it on. Now they may pick it up as time goes on. I don't know. My daughter married a man who is half Swedish extraction. And the first Christmas they were married and her new in-laws came down from Maine. She surprised her mother-in-law by fixing Swedish meatballs and brown beans and a few of the things. And I thought that's quite a terrific way to impress a new mother-in-law. And I don't know. The other children don't particularly carry it on. Now like I say, they may pick it up at some point. It's kind of fun. Have they followed your research back in time? The children? Pretty much. Of course, Roger especially, having lived in Sweden, helped me some with it. Marie at one point did go in Washington, D.C. and take a genealogy class just so that she would know more about it. Stuart has been quite interested in it. My nieces and nephews haven't really been exposed to it. My sister Marie's children. And on this side you also have been very much involved with the cemetery records and the cemetery itself, of course, the old pioneer here in Omaha. Prospect Hill. Prospect Hill, yeah. And there was 15,000 people there. Right, about 15,000. And they were starting to blossom up in 1975, before the bicentennial. We started cleaning it up about the bicentennial year. It was an 18-acre weed patch before then. Who put the weeds in motion on that one? Was there some drive for it? The Genealogy Society chose as a bicentennial project to see if we could do anything about cleaning up that old cemetery. It was terribly overgrown. You could not see most of the stones in the cemetery. It was really in very bad shape because there was no money for maintenance. Were there lower kind of stones or were there taller ones? Oh, all kinds. Particularly mulberry growth had taken over. And old stones that were maybe four feet high you could not see. It was very bad. And we did, we started the ball rolling in the Genealogy Society and got people interested. We called the TV stations and the radio stations and got all the publicity we could get to try to get other people interested in it. And it has worked. But the problem with it, all you had for support was because most of the people had moved away from here or they were dead. Well you... Descendants of the dead ones. Right, right. Moved out of state. But there are still a surprising number of descendants around, if you can find them. It's been rather interesting because we get articles in the paper every so often. The local daily is pretty good about covering what we do. But people don't step forward and say, hey, I have somebody buried there. I'd like to help. You know, just doesn't happen usually that way. But it's been a real interesting and worthwhile project. And you can see results, which is always nice. So within ten years then you had it all. Ten years, yeah. It's been up. Yeah. And now we are just getting ready for a fund drive, which is what we have to do to raise more money. All we have is a basic endowment fund and that does not really produce enough to keep up with rising costs. And just the upkeep itself is expensive. Oh yeah. An 18 acre yard. Yeah. And... You have broadcasted salt on them on brie trees and... Yeah. And we have gotten rid of most of them by salting them thoroughly. So this is the best method to get rid of them? Well, that's one method. They're terribly hard to get rid of. Some of them are coming up again even. They're very sturdy. There's also a four bedroom brick home with a 30 foot chapel attached on the property, which has... Is somebody living in that house? Yeah. Yeah. There is a caretaker living in the house. And... And that's all he's doing then? He lives there? He lives there. No. He's got his own... Well, yeah. Basically. Basically. And then helping visitors? Yeah. They have a nature. They're telling them where they can find them. Have you staked out all, most of the tombstones? Well... Where they are and... The record books tell. The record books. The record books tell. There are a few good record books preserved. Pretty fair. Mm-hmm. Some of the very, very early records are poor, but that's typical. And we can't do anything about that. We'll never find out some of that. And there are no burials taking place nowadays out there? Yeah. There still are burials taking place. We are averaging about four per year. But those are descendants of old lot owners. We no longer sell plots. The last burial we had, the lady was 104 years old, buried in a lot that was owned by her grandfather. And this is kind of what happens. We are obligated to bury those old lot owners. Even if they don't have a certificate to stake? Well... They got to prove it in some way to... They do, but you can pretty well... I mean, there's no problem. If they're 104, there's no question about it. Yeah, and her sister was buried there at 98. Now, there was hardly any question, but she had a right to be buried there, too. Were they coming from out of state, then, or in Omaha? She was from Omaha. We do get people who have lived out of state, usually they will be cremated if they live in Florida, for example, and the ashes will be returned to Omaha for burial. That's a very common thing in all cemeteries. And they can put up a tombstone? Yeah. On the Wichita. To mark the place. Yeah. A permanent record. You don't remove any tombstones? No, not in the U.S. Did you notice that in Sweden, though? I sure did. I have some pictures of some of the family tombstones in Sweden in 1969 that are no longer there. And I never found anybody who could tell me what happened to them when they removed them. Would the whole stone disappear? Yeah. When the plot is sold to some other family, the stone is removed. And where does that stone... 69 is not old enough, though. Well, but if the stone was there in 1969... Well, they were buried there maybe 25 or 50 years ago. Oh, well, who knows? Yeah. Well, they weren't all buried that much earlier, but after 25 years later, nobody paid for the plot again. It's sold to some other family. And those stones are removed. But where do they remove them to? Nobody ever could tell me. I found one cemetery where there was a pile off in one corner, but it wasn't a very big pile. There have been, over a couple of hundred years, there have been more stones than that removed, I think. And some of those stones are expensive. Sure, it's... All this granite. So what happens to them? Yeah. Yeah. The same thing happens in Germany, however. And when we have been traveling in these various countries, we usually go into cemeteries and look at the stones. And my husband did find one in Germany that he said he thought had been removed and been sliced off and re-lettered because it was thin. It was the only thin one we ever saw. And he said he would guess that that one had been reused. But those stones are bought and paid for by the families, and whatever happens to them, I don't know. I suppose there's shortage of land. I don't know. It's good to be a monument salesman, though, because you can sell them over and over again. Well, that's true. Every ten years you can renew it. Well when you go over there next time, see if you can find out what they do with them, with second-hand monuments. Well, they usually have them around the edge of the cemetery. I've seen a lot of them.