 We are 10th of March, 1987. I'm sitting together with Miss Julia Lind in Rockford, Illinois. And she was born 14th of December, 1896, in Rockford. Your father-in-law, Charles A. Lind. He came from Sweden. Yes. Apparently in 1871. Did he come directly to Rockford then? As far as I know they did. And also your mother, Carrie Peterson. She came to Pecatonica. First, with her parents? Yes, her parents were here. And they're buried out there in the cemetery near Pecatonica. So they were farmers there? No, he didn't go into farming. It was not well when he got here. He had to take light jobs. They lived right next to part of their relatives. And that's how they came here. And my uncle, my mother's son, he went to Minnesota. They became big farmers. And their family was all up there. And her sister also went up to Minnesota. How many were there, children in the family, your mother's? Let's see, as far as I know, one, two, three. Three. And your father, now, he came alone. He didn't have his parents with him. I don't know. I don't know. I don't think I ever heard him say anything about how they came over. He did talk about the awful trip they had across the Atlantic, and the awful pact, and the horrible conditions, unsanitary conditions. But I never heard more of that. They came to Rector, Rockford. They were met here by Pastor, I suppose he was there, Pastor Peters was there that time. I suppose, I may not be sure of that, of getting the two together. But Pastor Peters met many, many, many of the immigrants that came. And... Your father, now, he was born in 1846. Well, I don't have the dates. He was four, he was 25 when he came. And he had, let's see, Uncle Frank, Uncle Will, Uncle Robert, Uncle, four brothers and one sister. They were already here? I don't know. But they all came at once or not. I don't know. I never heard that I know of. If they did talk about it, I was too young to care, probably. And I probably wish I had. You don't remember if there were any uncles or aunts visiting you in your home in Rockford? You don't remember if you had any brothers and sisters visiting you here in the home in Rockford? Who, my dad? Yeah. They all lived right here. They all lived here? Yes. How many of them then? There were four brothers and one sister. The sister built the house over there and dad built this house. And the rest of my mother's people went up Minnesota. They went up? Some in St. James, some St. Paul, some Duluth. And that's the way they settled. And some went into grain business and farm business up there. But your father, now, he went into the furniture factories. Yeah. Almost immediately. Yes, just about. And became a cabinetmaker or shipping clerk he was also for a while. Yes. At Rockford. He had a hearing problem. He had to step down on some things because he couldn't hear. There was no hearing aids in those days. Was there from the factory noise, you think? I don't know. There could be because there's a lot of noise. No, I don't know whether it was sort of inherited or what. Was there at an old age he had that or even when he was a young person he had the... Well, as far as I know, he was always out of hearing. But he was also involved with other companies here, or a stockholder. Oh, yes. He was a busy man. Yes, he was busy. He was a wiry sort of person. Keep on going, keep on going, keep on going. All the time. And he also ventured into Scandi Applaud Company here in Rockford. Yes, he was in that too. Do you remember where the factory was located? Scandi Applaud wasn't that up North 2nd Street here? Close to Scandia... There was Scandia Furniture, though. Scandia was up there. Yeah. I can't say for sure about that, where that plant was located. But I wouldn't be surprised if it were up there. Maybe there was the same company, Scandia Furniture and Scandia Applaud. They were the same stockholders. It was a group of men that stuck together, but they were together all the way through. And he was also a treasurer and a clerk with the Union Furniture Company. Yes. He was a secretary there, wasn't he? Does that say secretary? Yes, it says secretary there. Cashier, you say. We say secretary. Secretary. And they were married then in the First Lutheran Church, your parents? I can't remember that. They were members there, though. They became members of the church and they always were. They never left it. They were there all their lives, as far as I know. And you went to Sunday school there? Uh-huh. I went to Sunday school. Pardon? As far as you can remember, you went to their church? Yes. Yes, I've always gone there and the folks have always gone there. I don't know just when they entered. They might have been here a while, not in this house, but... Did they have meetings and discussions then in this house, do you remember? For what? I mean, like the furniture business and Scandia Applaud? No, they were never brought home. They had meetings. They never came together in their homes? No, not like that. Business meetings were never here, around. They were at different sites? Oh, yes. Different places. You went to school then here in Rockford? Yeah. Grade school and high school? I went to Hall School. Did you go to a business college perhaps after? No. I went to high school, then I went to Rockford College, and then I went to the University of Illinois. I see. I graduated from both places. So Rockford College was there for ladies or girls only? Yeah. Only for girls? Uh-huh. So there was no place for the boys then to go to college here in Rockford? No, not in Rockford. That school was established in Beloit. That was the boys' school. This was more or less the girls' school. Female seminary, they called it. Oh, I see. And they were stressing some special subjects or...? Liberal arts. Liberal arts. So you went there two years then? I went there four years. Four years? And then to the university? Yes. And you had no trouble then to get into the university and keep up with the students coming from other places? No. You had a good curriculum here that... I got along....served you well? I got along. I'll say that. That's all. I went into library business down from the university. You went down to Urbana? Yeah. I took up library science. And there was another two years then at the university? No, just one. One year? Uh-huh. And then what did you do? And library science. I got a degree for it. And then when you came back... Yeah, then I......you got the position? Then I went to the library. I worked in the library in Rockford for 40 years. Forty years? Forty years. So you stayed close to home then? Yeah, I did. And... There were... the people didn't travel around as much as they do now, of course. And now they don't know where they live. There was quite unusual, though, for girls to go to, like, the college now and then on to university at the time. How many of your classmates from high school went that way? Oh, I don't know. I never figured that out. Not too many, though? I don't know. The colleges were full. University had thousands of people. Did they come from Rockford mostly, or... The university? No, I mean, Rockford College. Was it mostly Rockford people that went there? No, they had dormitories. They came from all over. All over? Yes, it's been noted. Rockford College had people from all over the country. But I mean, the classmates now in your high school graduating class, did many of them... I can't say that. You can't remember? I don't know. You don't know how many of your friends did... I don't know. And there was a tuition. How much did it cost them at that time? Do you remember? No, I don't know. I never handled that situation. It was up to your dad to pay the bills. Did you stay at home then when you went to college? Yeah, down there I did. Well, you stayed on... No, I stayed home. You stayed home? Uh-huh. Oh. I wanted to stay down there, but I didn't. You took the streetcar then, or you could walk? I could walk, yes. It's about a mile? I was beginning to learn to drive in those days. And we had a seven-passenger car. In your family? Yeah, here. Seven? Uh-huh. They had... Yeah. They had folding seats between the front and the back, but they called it a seven-passenger car. And I learned to drive on that car. With a seven-passenger car? Uh-huh. Oh. I learned to drive on that. Dad used to have... Dad wouldn't drive. He couldn't... He wouldn't because of his ears. And he used to get the car put in the backyard, and he'd tell me to go out there and start that car and back up in front, forward and park. That's the way I started to learn. They don't do that these days. They go out on the road. But I did drive that car. And you are still driving today? And the steering wheel was so big, I could hardly get my hands around it. What make was it? A Cole. C-O-L-E. Cole. Oh, I see. I don't know what company took that over. I don't know. They went out of business or what. It was a good car. That steering wheel was big around, and it was a wooden wheel. And I could hardly get my hands around it. I could hardly reach the pedals. So your dad never drove it then? No. No. So you had to be the driver and reach over? Not entirely. No. My brothers were here. How many of you? I had two brothers, Henry and George, and I had four sisters. Oh, so you were seven then in the family? Six. Six. What did I say? You said four. Four sisters. Four and two were six. And then you? No. I was counting all of us. I was counting all of us. We were six. Six kids. Four girls then? Yeah. Six kids. Four girls and two boys. And the boys, were they older than you then? They were. Well, you were the youngest. I see. And I'm the only one left. So he had a car quite early then in the 1900s. Did some of your brothers then drive him to work? He retired real early, and then he'd have a lot that he owned. He'd have a garden, and he did things like that. He was on this spot? No. No. Somewhere else down the line away. And he'd have a garden, and he'd have a – he had a horse. We had a horse, two horse and a car. And a barn? Huh? And a barn and two horse too? Yeah. We had a barn in the backyard by the alley. So when did he build this house then? 1892. Ninety-two. That was before you came along then. So you were – you've been in this house then all your life? All my life I've lived here. Maybe you were born here too? Yes. Born in this house? Uh-huh. It's quite unusual, you know. They don't – Not now it isn't. They don't do that now. But that was true. So how old were you then when you started to drive more regularly? About 18, 19? Well, I was – when I was in college I would drive. I would take the car down to college sometimes. So you trusted the youngest girl with the car? It was a big car though. I couldn't drive it today. I mean – You couldn't drive it today? I don't think anybody that age and that kind of a car and that heavy a car would want to drive in this traffic. But there wasn't the traffic. There wasn't that problem. There was no power steering or anything? Oh, no. How did I do it? I don't know. So you were able to back up then and everything and – Well, I avoided that as much as possible. Well, you drove around, huh? Forward. Oh, yeah. You drove around a lot. But North 2nd at that time was not one way. You could go both ways. No, no. We could park out front. So when you started to drive then, how was the traffic? There was not too many people owning a car at that time. No, there weren't too many cars around. The traffic wasn't – well, it just wasn't anything compared to today. The only thing you had to watch out for were pedestrians and streetcars. Streetcars. We had a streetcar going past here. Oh, so you had to watch out for that one, of course. Mm-hmm. Streetcar going past here. City car. City streetcar. And in urban, they traveled to Beloit and Janset. And they were wider? Uh-huh. Oh, I see. So we had that kind of traffic to watch out for. Because they – we used to think they thundered by, but today we wouldn't say that. So then you went to 1st Utrecht and you were confirmed there. Yeah. Were you confirmed in Swedish or – Yeah. In Swedish? Yeah, I didn't know much about it, but I was. But in your home now, your parents, they didn't talk too much English then, or – Oh, yes. They talked English right away. English right away? Uh-huh. Very little Swedish? Well, whatever came easiest, they would do. Dad was a great reader, and the newspapers were something to him. So he read the paper. Yeah, and he – yeah. And he went to library. Then when I told him, I said, I got a job at the library. Oh, he was glad. He liked that. How about the other sisters and brothers now? You had two brothers and three sisters. Did they also go to college? They went into the industry with them. With your dad? Yeah. They didn't go to college then? Everybody went to some college, either business or college or university. George went to Madison University, and Henry went to business college. Jen and Elm went to business college. We all had an education. So your dad, he apparently did pretty well then in the – I think he did. He invested in new things, like the Scandi Applau and – Oh, yes. Yes, he was active in a lot of things. He never lost any money then? Like in 93, there was a depression here or – Well, they suffered through it, but I never heard – I don't know. Some things were not talked about so much. Oh, they kept it for themselves. Was he also a good friend of P. A. Peterson? Oh, yes. They were in the same business. Same business. They were living fast. Hoagland National Lock? Oh, I don't know about – no, I don't think Dad was a National Lock. I don't remember. Maybe he was. How about Winard Brolin? Oh, yeah. They were friends and business – Because they were not living too far from here. No, right down the line here, about four blocks or so. It's a funeral home. Uh-huh. Yeah. They were – yeah, he was – they were all in business. Steeped in business, I'd say. They were good businessmen. And so you were brought up in the First Lutheran Church then with Pastor Seedorf, more or less. He was pastor as long as you remember. And – Pastor Peters. I remember him. But he was – I remember him as a retired person and he used to come here a lot, like Sunday afternoons. He'd stay for Sunday supper. He was a very friendly kind of person. We always liked to have him come. Pastor Seedorf was different. He was more aloof. Yeah. But he must have been a good pastor because he stayed for many, many years. He was a good pastor. Yeah. He was a good pastor. He stayed until Albert Lorén came. Yeah. And he stayed here many years. That's right. He – And since then it's been a – Off and on. Since then it's been moderate. Yeah. They stayed a few years and then they went on. Yeah. Five, six years seemed to be a good time. What do you think – no, I mean, you are from that old time. You think that's a good idea to keep the pastors along. In other words, they knew each other. If you get a good one like that. They should keep them. Right. Because the people like him. And then there were so many – there was so much controversy. Some liked to have it this way and some liked to have it that way. So they'd bunch together and leave the church. So they've – I don't know how many churches have started from First Luther. Many. Was that during Seedorf's time then? Yes. It was during all times. It was when the language question came up. They wanted to keep it Swedish. Well, the size of the church too. Maybe building it too big or something. Some things like that. So 1912 – Many churches have been started from our church. And we have a very small congregation today because all the churches are right – you see the center of Rockford. Every church wanted to be in the center of Rockford. And there are many of them in the center of Rockford. Town's gone. Town's out that way. Town's this way. Town's everywhere. And so we have too many churches in the center of town. People have to travel too far. Come into town. They'd rather go to a neighborhood church. They live outside the Alpine Road. They seem to be the church road instead of Alpine. That's another place that they're going to have too many churches. I think. But now, like, well, all of them are offsprings of 1st Luther. You have the Zion, of course, 1883. Oh, yes. Well, Zion came first. Zion came first. So did Emmanuel. Yes. And then you have the other ones up on Alpine. Some are the new ones. But some of them were because of the language question. Emmanuel was – they were probably started because they kept the Swedish too long in 1st Luther, they said. Don't you think? They said what? They kept the Swedish sermons. In 1st Luther. Yeah, we had a fight there. That is, of course. You remember that because they were old-timers. Oh, yes. Yes. Because we didn't like it. People my age didn't like it. You didn't like the Swedish, of course, because – No. We didn't know what they were talking about, mostly. But then the old-timers. They said they're going to be Swedish. They also said that God doesn't understand another language than Swedish. Well, that's about the way it – But how about your parents? No, they understood English. They had no trouble to understand both languages. I don't think. I don't think they had much trouble. So did they complain about the Swedish language – I mean, sermons? No. They never? No. No, they were more or less cooperative. Whatever. But then there was a big group of Swedes coming in that didn't understand English enough. Oh, yes. They rebelled against – if they went over to English. Oh, yes. Oh, every church went over to English. But there was a double service for many years. They would – for years, they had two services. One in Swedish and one in English. Do you remember Pastor Sidoff? He had a lot of children. Yes. Seven or eight. A lot of girls. There was one girl that was going to be married to a Swenson down in Helena, Arkansas. Do you remember that? No. Who was that? Gertrude? Well, I don't know which one it was, but she was going to be married, and that man down there, he shot himself. Oh, yes. That was Gertrude. You remember that? What time was that, about the First World War? I can't place that. Or in the 20s? I wouldn't dare to say. I don't know. It was in my lifetime. I was a teenager, probably. Well, I think it was later, though. Probably after the First World War. Oh, was it? So you must have been in the 20s. Do you remember Gertrude Sidoff then? Oh, the whole family. Oh. That was an awful shock. Someone told me that she was ready to go down there and to be married. She was buying things for the house and doing things for herself. Was she going to move down there into Helena? Well, I suppose so. You didn't know the boy she was going to marry? No, I didn't know him. But she later married somebody else, I suppose. I guess she did. Yes, she did, but not around here, so I didn't know. So she moved away then? Yeah, the two girls, Gertrude and Thorberg was the older one. They left. So she married the pastor, or you don't remember who she married? I don't know. They are all gone. They're not in Rockford? You had no... Are they dead now, you think, most of them? No, they shouldn't be. Oh, there's some of them living, but some are dead. Some of them younger than you. Must be. But they are all in Rockford. They all left Rockford. So you worked at the library? I think there was one that stayed here. Einar, I think, stayed. He died early. And Arnold, they were here in Rockford for quite a while. They either died or went somewhere else. But Pastor Seedorf, he ended his service here when he died, in other words. He stayed until he died. Seedorf. He stayed what? He stayed as a pastor at the First Lutheran until he died. He didn't move away from here, Seedorf. I don't know whether Lorraine came before that or not. I can't remember. No, he came after Seedorf. Yes, Lorraine did, but did he come to Rockford? Was he a pastor of the church before when Seedorf was still living? I think it's possible. He probably retired as a pastor from here. Yeah, he did. I don't think he had another. So then you had Pastor Lorraine. He was very relaxed. He'd go out in the streets and play ball with the kids. Oh, he did? Yeah. So he was well liked, though. Oh, yes, very much so. So what was he different compared to Seedorf? Seedorf was very formal. Oh, very formal? Uh-huh. I see. So you didn't go up and say, you know, how are you doing or so on? You had to keep your distance. We began to call people by their first names under Lorraine. I think that'll explain it to you. Oh, I see. But they couldn't call Pastor Lorraine by the first name, though. Well, it wasn't... Like the church council, for instance. I don't know about that, but it started about that time that everybody was being called by their first name. Oh, so he brought a new trend. He was open-minded in so many things. See, there's a Swedish term, isn't there? Härskap. Härskap, yeah. That was Seedorf. He made away with the Härskap, Lorraine. Härskap, isn't that something above the ordinary person? I think that's what he thought the minister's job was. I feel that that was it. But do you think some of the people liked that? I mean, to have somebody to look up to? Or do they felt oppressed? Well, they got so they called people by their first names, and that was lowering it. The wars did that, some of it. They made things more familiar. So people liked that better. Did the church grow again then after Lorraine came in, or what happened? Well, it gradually went down before he left. That was because of the time, though? It was because controversies arose, and people left, and the city grew, and they left. St. Mark's is the last one that left. 30, 40 people left at once. You know, the groups left. Well, let's leave. Let's start another church. They'd like to have taken the organ along with them, but they didn't get a chance. We have a marvelous organ. Most outstanding organ. You mean some of them actually asked to take the organ off? Well, the rumor was that. Let's say that. Let's be fair all the way around. Some of them would like to have taken it. Why is that that some people group together and get—do they have a shorter attention span or shorter fuse than others? In other words, they can't sit still? I don't remember what it was all about, really. I wasn't in with any group. Some of our family left, too. A nephew that left went to St. Mark's. Oh. Did he tell you the reason? Just because everybody else did. I said it was mob psychology. So they had something to do with it. They feel stronger then. They feel much stronger. And if you do it and another one do it, then you are all right. Well, let's see. They did it because somebody else did it. Was this during Dr. Lorraine's time? Or was it after? No. I don't know for sure. I don't know for sure. We had several pastors that didn't stay very long after Pastor Lorraine. But he seemed to be so relaxed and diplomatic. You would think people would relax having him as a pastor. Maybe he was too much relaxed. Maybe they wanted to have him sculpted back. I don't know what the—I can't put it down to a cause. I just don't think I know. There is a saying that people like to see the pastor a little bit above, so they can look up to him. If they get too friendly with you, he's just like an ordinary person. And they don't feel good about it. But that's what the style is today. Yes. But do you think that's good? A little of both. They can overdo it. They can overdo it as hair sculpting. They can overdo it as two common citizens. But Dr. Lorraine— There's an in-between where they can relax and have fun with their— —years as a librarian or archivist. Well, I wasn't the only one. We were like a committee. We were about three. How did you come into that one? Because you had your experience, of course, with library science. So you were a natural good person to use. So when did you start with that, to keep the records, the old records together? That was the main project of the whole thing. It took just about all our time. And you started in the 1950s? Well, I don't remember the years. I don't remember years. I'm not good at that. My memory isn't good anymore. But I remember that you had your first old records microfilm in the early 1950s. Yeah, well, when you came here before. Well, I came in 1969. Is that the first day? Yes. But I remember there was two rolls of film from the very early time, early records in the 1950s. So you must have started with it at that time to see the need for it. I think I did. Where did you find the records? Did they have a safe? They were in boxes in the basement and in not very good shape. There's dampness and so forth. And we were the first ones to organize it. It was a big problem. Were people for this work? In other words, you did it without pay, of course. But were people for it, to save the old records? Or what did they say? Yeah, nobody was against it. Once in a while, somebody would come and say, well, have you got any records of our people? And if they could give us enough information, we could go to church books, church registers. And from the church registers, we could go to the files that we had organized and give them the transfer letter or a copy of it. And all that's gone down to Kelton now. We don't have it anymore. Yeah, I noticed that you have done a tremendous collating job on those dismissal letters. You probably have one of the biggest collections in the United States. On the letters? On the letters. You had them numerically arranged. But the question is, what happened to the older records? Because the records they have at the Kel are only from 1930 and up to 1940s and 50s. Oh, that can't be. They are not there. 1930. They come in there. There are some of the older records in the Kel, like typewritten membership records from 1854 and 1860 and an index book. Oh, those records. Those are the church books. Yeah, the membership records. Yeah, the membership. But we had the transfer records. Yeah, they are down there. Yes. They are down there. But what happened to the big membership books? They are preserved, but I don't know where. We still have the books. At the church? Must be. Because they are not at the Kel. They are not at the Kel. No. Well, they must be at the church. At the office. The idea was to have it all microfilmed. Yes, they were microfilmed. And they were. Yeah. But they were to keep the original. So they must be somewhere. But I haven't had anything to do with it for a long time. I don't know where. You've been on this subject for many years now. For ten years? I've been on it. I don't know. They don't have the books at the Kel? No, they are not at the Kel. Then they must come back to the church. They may be in bank storage or something like that. I don't know. Is there a vault at the First Lutheran Church? No. There is no vault? No. Some records, but I don't know if they are in the banks. Oh, I see. And some are, I don't know what type of records. I can't say that. Whether they are books or not. That would be big storage and I don't know how they do it. Some of the books are big. Oh, yes. But you worked there for many years on this committee. Oh, yeah. I was at least ten years on it. And you worked side by side with Dr. Albert Lorin. He came in every morning translating the whole minutes. Well, he was retired and had moved to a retirement home. And he didn't have anything to do. And they let him have an office down at the church in the hall. And he'd come down and he'd go into the office and he'd say, haven't you got something for me to do? And they came to us and said, haven't you got something Pastor Lorin can do? So we got the idea of translating. That's how it started. And they are all in English language now, the translations of it, from Swedish minutes? Well, I think so. He said, once I'm all through with this now, I haven't got anything to do. So I think so. It's a remarkable job because there were a lot of pages. Yeah. But he'd come down every morning and sit in his office there in Lorin Hall, translate those books. I can't remember. Did he drive himself then? He did until it didn't go so good. Somebody picked him up or? Or he came down. I don't know how he got down. Somebody picked him up maybe. Maybe he came down by bus. I think he came by bus sometimes. He lived in his own home until he died? Oh no, he lived in, he moved out to Fairhaven. Oh, he was out there the last year before he died. I see. No, he was at Wesley Willows. He started at Fairhaven, he didn't like it. He went out to Wesley Willows. So there was an old pastor's work. He left a good legacy after him. No, I don't think he could tend to do it. He used to give talks out there. Loved him out at Wesley Willows. I think he used to give devotions or something out there. But it's a Methodist home, isn't it? Yes. How was he towards other churches? Was he liberal? In other words, he invited other pastors from the Covenant and the Free? Oh, he was liberal. He was friendly. I have never known anything other than that. Of course, what goes on behind closed doors I can't talk about. I don't know. But did they have exchange of pulpits like they do today? I mean, now they shift pulpits all over, you know what I mean? What do you mean? Yeah, like Catholics coming into Lutheran churches and Covenants and Baptists and Methodists and... Well, they get together and have, what do they call these types of speeches? They choose a subject and then they have a Protestant and a Catholic. Yeah, especially during Lent, they have those exchanges. Well, we haven't lately, but we used to do that. I don't know what series time of the year they came. They came any time, I thought. They don't do that so much now, but they do get along better. Churches get along. I can't say enough. He didn't have that time. Oh. It never happened. Oh, no. I don't think they ever thought of it. I don't know. There were strict lines then between the Lutherans and the Free and the Covenant and the Baptists. Oh, my. Oh, yes. You never had any ball games or anything like that? Pastor Ray, they had some things like that, picnics and very informal. So he had an open mind. Mm-hmm. So how has the church now changed over the years since you started in Sunday school? Getting smaller and smaller. Oh, you mean the membership? But that's probably because of the location. Maybe people are dying off and the young ones... I don't know. But you got young members in the First Lutheran Law. We don't have many. So there's no regrowth in that. No. You might call it an older church and they're dying off. But you would think years ago I would see the difference if you live out in Cherry Valley. You don't want to go downtown Rockford because you had horse and buggy. But nowadays, I mean, it doesn't make any difference if you travel in car ten minutes. No, it doesn't, especially if you're going to a ball game. You can add many mice. Yeah. But I don't think they do it for churches as much as they used to. It is just the idea then. They'd like to be in the arts. I don't know. Like the shopping centers are moving out. Oh, yes. The center of town will be east. Downtown will never be a downtown. The same again. That type of a downtown, it'll be office and professional and some small stores probably. Nobody knows. But it's going better than it has done. How about the other churches, the Methodist Church and the Presbyterians down there? Do they try or have they moved out too? I can't say so much. I don't think I can say what they have done as far as starting new churches from their own church. The Methodist Church here is the oldest in this side of the river. And then I think the Catholic Church, St. James over here, came in about a year before the Lutheran Church came in. Those are the three oldest. They're having just as much trouble over there. They also have trouble. They're getting people to go to church. You would think they want to start a new church. It costs a lot of money. Why don't they spend half of that money in the church already? Yeah, that would be nice. But the problem is probably parking. We have plenty of parking for our church, but if we had a full congregation, I don't know. But on a Sunday you can park. I suppose during the weekdays you can't. The weekdays, the city takes over nine-tenths of our parking lot. They rent it. But Sundays? Sundays it's there, but that wouldn't accommodate the number of people if the church was full. We have some lots around there that could take some more, but they wouldn't sell them, I guess. So there's the struggle. Yes. Struggle for survival. Do you have that over in your country? Well, we don't have that trouble because there's plenty of parking. I know that. Do they like to go to church? How about the hymnals and the music? Has that changed to the better in your ears, for instance, when you go to church now? Do you feel familiar with the hymnals they sing, with the hymns they sing? Yes and no. We sing a lot of hymn songs, as I call them, that we're not familiar with, but they're in the Lutheran book. Yes, in other words, they've been included. But do you feel... We try to go through and bring out a new one all the time, try to get familiar with it. But once you get the hang of it, to sing them, then they bring in new ones. Is there a bar, do you think, for people that goes every Sunday if they don't feel at home, in other words? They want to sing things that they know. So there's a very minute group that brings in the new just to please them? Well, I don't know. Think about you older people, how you feel. Oh yes, we have that too. You have the feeling that the young people in the church council, do they appreciate what you are doing and do they try to please you? Or do you try to please the young ones? I think they try to please everybody. That's the aim in our church, it has to be, because there's a few. They try to do very hard for the young ones. We've got young ones coming in, new families. So they have to do things for the young ones. When you were growing up, going to Sunday school, four or five years old, you started to learn some bible verses and small things by heart. Started to sing the hymns. And a lot of them are Swedish of course. And then you got older, you got confirmed, and you went to church, continued after. You have to do what your parents had done. In other words, follow what was tradition. You never said, for instance, like this, let us take this out and put in the newer ones that I like. You never questioned that. I do today. Let's sing more familiar songs. Yeah, but today you have to please the young ones. They raise the question, as soon as they are five years old, we don't like to sing this, we've got to have something more modern. Yeah, I don't know if it works two ways or not. Do you think that's good? Well, you've got to please everybody. Yeah, but this pleasing business, is that good in the long run? Why should you as an older person sit and listen to something you don't really feel at home with? Does it bother you? It doesn't bother me so much. It bothers some, I know. I can take it, either way. But I do like the familiar songs. Don't you think church is a tradition? I mean, for you being a small girl now going to church with your parents. You like to have that feeling all through your life. I think so. I think the kids today will feel the same way. They want to do what they did, but they're more freer in church. They're more free. Did they and our parents, did they belong to some organizations in Iraq with a Swedish-American background? Like Switzerland, Vasa, Temperance, Lyron? No, they didn't. They only belonged to the church. But you belong to the Swedish Historical Society. Yeah, I do. And the Swedish Cultural Society, too? Well, I don't exactly belong. I go once in a while. But your parents didn't belong to the... They didn't have it then. They didn't have it at that time. They came later. So the church was their main organization. And then business. Business. Business and church. Or church and business. Business and church, I guess. Both ways. Your dad now, what year did he die? 1940. 1940. So he went through the Depression then. Oh, yeah, the 29 Depression, surely. But he was retired at that time. Oh, yes. How was the Depression for him? What did he say about it? He was out of the business then completely. He didn't have any... He never said a whole lot. He never said much about it. He was always worried about somebody else being hurt. And a lot of people were hurt. Oh, they were. Everybody was hurt. They got used to it. But some of them lost homes and foreclosures and everything and had to walk away. That, not only in the old Depressions, but the modern ones, like the Brolins, for instance. Yeah, the Turris. They had to walk away from their house. The big one here on Hall Street. There must be a hard blow. I mean, he was a wealthy man. Who? Brolin? He was in lots of industry, but he lost it. So there was just like a mushroom. It just exploded, the whole thing. Well, I don't know much about his business, I wouldn't say. He's unfortunate. They lost a lot, I know. And Levin Faust? Yeah. He lost the big Tebala Tower, or whatever it's called today. Yeah, they're down here. They're fixing it for apartments now. And it's going back to the old name. Uh-huh. Faust Hotel? I don't know much about the hotel. There won't be a hotel. But Faust will be on the name plate. I understand so. And I think that's nice. Do you remember him personally? Oh, just remember seeing him, that's all. I didn't know him. I knew the family, but I didn't know him very well. How about the P.A. Petersen? Do you remember him? Yes, I remember them all. They were a group of tough Swedes. They were hard workers. Hard workers. But do you think the women, don't you think they had to work harder than the men? Harder than? Yeah, because they had to feed a big family, like your mother, you know, six children, and keep things together. You came from a well-to-do family, in other words. Your father was a provider. But a lot of working families, you know, that were working in the factories there, how were they able to keep the family together? Laid off for two, three years during the Depression? I don't know. They were still able to keep food on the table. They stayed together, though. It's remarkable. I think so, too. And especially women, they couldn't understand the business side of it either, because they didn't take part of it. I'm sure your mother didn't take part in your father's businesses. No. She didn't know what was going on. Oh, yes, she knew what was going on, but she didn't take any part in it. She knew what was going on. Well, but I mean, she was home. Oh, yes. Dad, he was out, you know, looking at notes and signing notes. She had to get it secondhand. Were you interested in your father's business ventures? Yes. Did you take part in it? No. No? No. My older sisters did. They worked for your dad? Uh-huh. I see. And the boys did. But I didn't. Were they with the Scandi-Aplah Company? Oh, no, that was before that. After I met them, they were after that. They petered out after a while. Yeah. Uh-huh. Do you remember when they had a horse and buggy? Who? Your family. Well, sure. We always had a horse. We had a horse and we had a car. We kept a horse. How did you buy hay then? From a liver stable down here in Rutherford. You bought hay and... Well, I don't know where Dad bought it. Because it was not big enough to... Oh, of course. He bought it and I don't know where he did it. I used to ride a horse, horseback. Oh. But you didn't have a farm then outside? No, we didn't. We were not farmers. He didn't go for the farm then? You were not a farmer either? How about now when you were all dating boys? What did your mother tell you? They had a good time. She said that? Yeah, sure. Didn't she warn you for not going with the Italians or Irish? That was... No, she didn't have to because we didn't like them. But how did you know that? I mean, you were younger, you know, 14, 15. We had no problem. How old were you then, you know, nowadays, to date when they are 10? Oh, high school age. 15, 16? Yeah, 17. What's that noise? There's a dog. There's a dog. Is it? Yeah. So what did you do then on a date? Did the boy ask you out or did you ask the boy out? Oh, let's not go into this. Huh? Let's not go into this. Yeah, but I mean, it's interesting, you know, for history. Let's not go into this. You know the custom how they do it. Well, yeah. They changed over there. Usually the boy asks. Yeah, but what did you... Were you able to... Or you had permission to go in the car, for instance, and take a ride up to Beloit? No. They couldn't do that? No, nobody did that then. No, I don't want to go into that. Were people more... At that time, you could trust people more, though? Yes. You felt that? Yes. You were not afraid, I mean, to walk at night, for instance, down to the hospital? No, no. I used to walk at night. You were never afraid to walk back and forth? No. Because nowadays it's a different story. Yeah, but how about... How about the drunks now, laying in the street sometimes in the summertime when it was warmer? They never bothered you? Occasionally you would see one, but they wouldn't... They never bothered people? No. They were up around... We didn't see them up around here. They were more down on 7th Street. 7th Street had it. They were Sweden. Yeah. They were more down on 7th Boulevard. They liked their drink, I guess. But that was never a problem here in this house. No drinking, no smoking. It was... All of that took place. How about now... You didn't have any stores around here, though. You had to go in close to town. We only had five blocks to town. To town. Did you go to 7th Street when you did... No, I didn't go to 7th Street. Downtown? Over the river mostly. You had all the... Over the river, too? That was the main part of town, over the river. This is the older part of town, but the bigger stores were over the river. On the west side? West. But there were no Swedes there, though. Why they were everywhere, I don't know. There were Swedish stores. I thought there were more Irish. No, not stores. No. No. They were on the east side. They had most of their businesses on the east side. Same with the factories. It was east side. That was the way the town grew. But they had modern stores where you could buy anything you wanted, in dresses and shoes. All over, sure they did. We had what they called Dry Goods Store on State Street. They called it Dry Goods Store in that time. Instead of department store, it was small, but they had everything. There were all types of stores on State Street. And there you had the doctors and the dentists and... Oh, yes. Dr. Urboom and Dr. Olsen. I don't know any of them, but... any of those, but... But you didn't have to go to the doctor if you were sick at that time. You could call them and they came to the house. That's right. That was a nice thing. Family doctor. He came to the house then. Made house calls. So that was the old good time. Was it good or was it... well, you look back at it. It was a good time. It was a good time. I had lots of good times. It was more relaxed. Yeah. No rush. Stress is the term today. I don't think there was that much stress years back. That is for ordinary people, those who were in industry, yes. They had stress. They had it. Like your dad now. Yes. Could you see them when he came home at night? No, he never... No, he never said things like that. Did you go on what we call vacations when you were growing up? Yes, we used to go to the lakes. Lake Geneva? We went to Lake Delaware mostly. And then later on we used to go up to Mackinac Island. All the way up there? Yes. You took the car then? No, we'd take either the boat out of Chicago or train. I see. So you stayed for a week then or maybe a week and a half? Oh yes, we stayed. You had a cottage up there? No, no, we never had a cottage anywhere. They didn't want to bother with it. They'd rather just pick one up there. You could do those in those days. So the whole family left then? Not always. It depended on how old they were and what they wanted to do. But your dad, he took time off then to relax and be with you? He liked to go to Lake Delaware because he kind of liked fish. Well... I thought you were a Republican. I thought your father was a star Republican. I'm not going to tell you. I'm a Republican. You are a Republican? Yes. Oh, do you know her father? No, no, no, no. I'm not that old. You've been born too young. I'm only 73. She talked about Vadstein, my mother. Her name now is Carrie. Was that Karin in Swedish, you think? Let's see. Carolina. Yeah, Carolin. And she went by Carrie. Carolin. Carolina. Carolina Pettersson. Do you have any contact with Sweden now? You don't write any letters or Christmas cards or anything like that? We haven't lost track of anything. After they died? No. They just didn't have the idea of doing it. Oh? Had it been something like today, we would have probably pursued it. So you don't know if you have any cousins or people related to you? It's a past history.