 Chassette 2, Psy 2. So you joined the Baptist Church? Up in Iowa, that's where I joined, up there. Yes, but I mean, you wouldn't have joined here. And then I joined here after we were married. The Bethany Baptist Church. Yeah, because Andrew joined then after we were married. And you were married at that church also then? No, we were married at the parsonage of the Plymouth Congregational Church. No. Well, anyway, it was on 12th Street and 12th Avenue. Why did you marry there? Was it somebody's... The minister was gone down there in church at the time. I see. So we just got married in his house in the parsonage. You were in a hurry then? Yeah. I didn't want a wedding either, you know. So I didn't... and Andrew, of course, didn't either. And then you bought this house in 1940... I think 1945, I think. After the war? Mm-hmm. Yeah. And there was nothing here. It was all completely unmodern. The only basement under here. Well, he bought the house already built then. Oh, yeah. Yeah. And he dug that all out by hand, that whole end there. And we put in furnace and bathroom here, which I don't like. It should be by the bedrooms, you know. And this room had wind scoting and no cupboards. And it had one of those sinks like this with no nothing. We did have running water and a stool down in the basement. No bathroom, no water heater, no furnace. And he did all this work, finished off the attic so the boy could have that for his room. Just terrible. It was foolish. He could have bought a new house about a year or two or more before that for only $1,000 more than what this cost us. And by the time we got all done here, it cost more than that new house would have cost. And there was a garage. There was no garage here. Did the prices go up then after he bought a... It was at the time of the war, I think. His brother's-in-law, anyway, thought it wasn't a good time to buy. But it would have been. I could have gone out and worked a little bit instead of working so hard with this real hard work like this was. As my leg opened up, I had a bad leg ever since I had my son. And then it got worse when I had the daughter. And then I couldn't afford a heavy elastic stocking, so it opened up. And those ulcers are so terribly hard to cure. But I finally got it cured after I had a stroke. I went to this lady napropath, and that helped my face. I was all paralyzed, you know. I couldn't talk good, and I couldn't lick off a spoon on this side. My eye, I had to open and shut it by hand. It's still stiff, you know. It bothers me, but I think- Therapy for it then? Yeah, that was a napropath, something like osteopath, but it's different, and it isn't chiropractic. But I go to a chiropractor now. He's helped me so much. I got so bad in my leg, I couldn't hardly walk. In this leg, that was sciatic. And then I have arthritis, and he's helped me so much. So I'm still going to him now. I say he keeps me out of a rest home. I don't want to go in a rest home. Andrew didn't be there. I had him in a rest home for three weeks, and I think that's why he made up his mind he wasn't going to have to go to a rest home again. He was clear at times, you know. He's always talked this way, the easiest way to go. He was always thinking, what would be the easiest way to go? And he thought that would be the easiest way. I hadn't hid the keys. I had thought of doing it because I thought sometime maybe he's going to get in the car and drive and cause an accident. Maybe somebody killed, maybe not him, but others, you know. But I didn't do it because I knew it would make him mad if he couldn't find his keys. So on this Sunday morning, it was on April 15, Palm Sunday, I didn't know he was up. He always got up ahead of me. He didn't sleep in the morning. I always liked to sleep in the morning. So I came out here, and he hadn't eaten his breakfast. He always wanted prunes and breakfast food. That's all he wanted, and coffee, and he'd help himself to that. And he was in the basement mostly with his shaving and everything, you know. So I thought he was down there when I came out here. I didn't look for him until I didn't hear him at all. I called down there, and he didn't answer. So I went down and looked. I thought maybe he had gone to sleep. He'd sleep in his recliner a lot down there, and he wasn't down there. About two weeks before that, he said, You don't think I'll do it, do you? And I said, No, I don't think you will. And so I thought, No, I wonder if he has done it. So I come out, and I looked, and I could see the car was in. The key was in the garage door. So I thought, Oh, what's he doing out there? He had the mower fixed. He was mucking with that, and our son had helped him fix it, so I knew that was fixed. And I thought, Well, I wonder if he's – I waited a while because I thought maybe he'd just come in, you know. And he didn't come in, so I thought, Should I go out there? I didn't want to go out, of course. And I finally thought, I guess I have to go out because there's nobody else here. So I had to go by myself. I opened the door, and he was laying right inside a little door like that, you know, that comes this way. His feet were right by the door. So I thought, I wonder if it got too much for him, and he was planning to come out because he was laying there on his back. He was gone. I could see that right away. The motor was running, and there was fumes in there just like out of a chimney when I opened the door. And I went in and shut off the motor, and they told me I could have been overcome too just doing that. And I could have because it took a little while, and I couldn't seem to get it turned off. I guess I was shaky, you know. So that afternoon I did get a headache, but that was from that, I imagine. So he was gone. How many years ago was that? Two years, last April 15th. So he was 80. He would have been 82 if he lived till July. Yeah. And some people seem to think I should have been able to prevent it, but I couldn't see that. Our bedrooms are so terribly small, you know, so instead of sleeping in the same room, we slept in each room after the kids went, you know. So that way I didn't hear him at all when he went out. I thought I heard him up, but then I didn't get up because I didn't have to get up yet to go to church. I was going to go to church. So I thought I didn't know what to do, you know, because I thought if I come out there, and he comes too, as long as he wanted to do it that way, he would have been real mad at me if I had come out there and he wasn't gone yet. I had that on my mind too, see. So it was a hard, hard thing. And some people thought, didn't you hear the car running? How could I? Windows and doors were closed, and I'm hard of hearing, and he was in there with the door closed. I couldn't hear the car. I couldn't even hear it when I opened the door. I was halfway out to the garage where I heard it was running, and I thought, yeah, I guess he's done it. That was the end of his life. So, yeah. So you have recuperated from your stroke? From that, I've been pretty good, but this last spell now, I don't think I'm going to get over that. That was congestive heart failure, and I think I'm filled up with water again, you know, fluid. That's what that is. So you had to take medication for it? Yeah, I take heart medicine and then this Lasix, that's for the fluid. I had quit medication because my medical doctor, oh, he had gotten kind of funny to me after this suicide. He seemed to kind of think it was my fault, you know. How can they say things like that because they don't know? Well... You can't watch a person 24 hours a day. No, you can't watch them. So that's probably an unfounded theory. Yeah. So anyway, it kind of turned me against him. Then when I was getting along so good with the chiro, I thought, why should I take pills? I know now that I should have kept on with the water pill. Probably I wouldn't have gotten filled up like that and gotten this sick, you know. Yet anyway, a time it would have come anyway, I think, but I probably could have gone on a while longer without it. So I was taking a pill that agreed with me, but he gave me a pill that ruined me. That was in 1980. That's when my heart went on the blink. I never had any heart trouble before that, and that's what turned me against him with his pills, because he didn't warn me at all, and nobody else had. But I got so bad, I thought I was going to die, and Andrew was living then. He thought I was going to die too. I couldn't hardly walk, and I was just terrible, you know. So I decided to try just taking one pill. I called the doctor, and he wouldn't even talk to me. I just told the nurse, and the nurse told me to keep on taking them. Well, I quit taking, so I took one a day instead of two, and I could tell a little bit of difference, so I quit both of them. And when I told him, he said, oh, it couldn't be that. Well, it had to be. I said I never had any heart trouble before at all. I've always been so strong. I've been just like Andrew. I could do anything, and as soon as I was sick, I'd get over it, and that was it. But I've had trouble ever since with that, and then now when I've filled up with water, I don't think the heart will ever get back now because it's so irregular, you know. And of course, I have high blood pressure too. But you're out in the garden and working. Oh, yeah. I work until it hurts and I get sick, then I quit. You enjoy the outdoors. Yeah. I think that's the only thing a person can do. The only thing missing is a horse. Yeah, I need a horse. If I sit very long, I feel worse than if I'm working out in the garden. You've got to be occupied. You've got to be going. That's something to do. And the joints get worse too. It's so bad in the shoulder I couldn't even feed myself. The chiro got that working. So your children, you said your daughter, she died very young. She died. 39 and a half. Out in California. Four children. Four huge babies she had. Her last two babies were 11 and 10 pounders. Did she marry the Swedish? Yeah, he was Swedish. He abused her before that while they still lived here. He abused her. Was he from Berlin? He was from Minneapolis. And your son? He married a girl. She was too young. She was not quite 17. Was he a Swedish background? She's Swedish, yeah. But that didn't work out. He got her in the family way. She said she couldn't get pregnant and then you know what happened. So she wasn't quite 17 when they got married. I think that was the whole thing. I told us I tried to get him to leave her alone, you know. He was in with the younger ones because he had polio. So he didn't get in with guys his age because they were in service. Then he got in with the younger boys and girls both. And I think he was feeling bad, inferior, because of his condition. He made model airplanes. He had all kinds of model airplanes. He worked in the basin here so much by himself. So it bothered me. I thought he's just feeling left out because he couldn't get into service on account of his polio, you know. But it turned out all right. But this marriage and divorce, he had this nice big house and he gave her everything, cars, motorcycles, and every kind of improvement in the house. But nothing suited her. She just finally was tired of marriage, I guess. But it wasn't long until she got married again. But he didn't want to get married and then he had others come and live with him, you know. They know he's got a good job. They have divorces and then they come there to him, you know. And that bothers me because that's all they want is a living, good living. Yeah. It's a different world than yesterday. Yeah, it sure is.