 So those Christmases, what do you remember then about Christmas? Was it the food, Santa Claus, the tree, the food I suppose was the one that... Yeah, well and being together, I guess, being together. We had a dining room table and that table always will be part of both of our memories because that table was the family circle. At Christmas time, I just know that we had lütfisk and riesgrünsgeröt. Otherwise it wasn't that important when we were growing up. We had plenty of food and we had food we liked. But since then, we have enlarged upon it because we have grown and we have smörgåsbord plus our lütfisk, which is becoming less and less favored because our children and grandchildren don't care for it. There's only one of Esther's children who really will eat it. And we don't think that we should have everybody, as long as they don't want it, they don't even like the smell of it. Why do you think it's an idea people have or is it they don't have the appetite for it period? Do you remember any in your age group, for instance, that doesn't like lütfisk? They were born in Sweden, or your age group. In Sweden? Yeah, they were born in Sweden and come over here and they say they don't like lütfisk. You eat lütfisk and your sister? Most of my friends do. They like it. But I can't say for all of them because maybe they didn't have it at their table the way we did either. You know, I don't know that. So your daddy bought the dry fish? And he would skin it and saw it into pieces and then my mother and he would work at the – it started on a certain day before Christmas. I don't know how many days before Christmas. And in those days you had cool places to keep it. We wouldn't have any cool place to keep it now if we were going to – unless it's out on the porch, then it'd freeze. So there you are. But in those days you could, you had places to keep it. The basements were cool. We even had an attic stairway that was cool that we could keep it. Not anymore. And now lütfisk isn't what it used to be. And the surprising thing to me was when I was in Sweden, oh, nine, ten years ago, something like that, visiting, I found out that the young people over there are not all wild about lütfisk for Christmas. They ska ha kalkon, and turkey to us is – Thanksgiving. And I think it's a comparatively new thing in Sweden. They have turkey as a meat. So there's different ideas that's implanted. Yeah, it is. And of course now the lütfisk we get sometimes is frozen. It's okay. But when you compare it what we have had, it doesn't stand – it's at the bottom of the ladder. But you like to have it as an added feature to the Christmas table? If nothing else, Esther's son, and she and I will have during the holidays a meal of it. So you still prepare a good Swedish – Yeah, sylt. We don't make our own sylt anymore. We did for years, but not anymore. Korv, we don't make korv. We could buy it as excellent now. There's a church up here that makes a business of it just before, oh, I don't know, right after Thanksgiving. They have a production of kukukorv. Of Tabor Lutheran? Of Tabor Lutheran. And it is excellent. And if you get your order in early enough, you can get it. So we get there. So there are still some old Swedes then that know how to do it? Oh yes, yes there are, I'm sure. I don't know how Swedish they are, but they make good korv. What counts? They maybe have a recipe, you know, from way back when. You went through high school then in Rockford and continued on to college? Yes, I finished high school here and I went two years at Rockford College. Then I finished up down at DeKalb, which was a teacher's training. So your parents were particular for you to continue education then? Oh, that was high, sky high. And your sister did the same thing? She graduated from high school and then she wanted to go into – I don't know, I want her to speak for herself on that – but she did go to a Sherwood music school in Chicago by correspondence. So she's got a degree from that school. So she was interested in music? Oh, she has a natural talent. Was there in the family, your father for instance, was he a musician? My mother, on my mother's side. We found out when we were home visiting that that is where the musical talent comes from. My mother told us when she was a young girl in Sweden, she lived in – her father was working as a handyman off of Barunen, you know. It was really part of the feudal system. Han var vagnmakare, or whatever else a vagnmakare did. And my mother had got a violin and had a few lessons. And evidently she had the natural talent. And when Barunen could not find music, he sent for Johanna to come and play for us dance. So that was it. That's another story. Did she play on the meetings here too? No, she didn't do much here. No, not – no, uh-uh. I don't remember that she ever did play that I can remember. Were you interested in the musical? Yeah. Until I started going to college and it took up so much of my time, because I played the violin. We did a lot of playing, my sister and I, around here in Rockford. We played for Teatershälskåpet when they put on their Swedish plays, you know. Bermlindarna, I don't know what else, some of those. So you played with Ingrid, Ingrid, then? What? Ingrid, you knew Ingrid? No, Esther did. You see, that's later on. She played the piano. See, Ingrid, the daughter, played the accordion. And Edgarn played the violin. And later on, they had a son who played the drums. But this was during the time when Esther's husband just passed away, very young, and she had her three children. And she went out and played with them for dances at lodges around. But she can tell you more about that when you interview her. So, and, so you continued on then and became a teacher? Yeah. High school teacher, or? No, I, an elementary teacher. So by the time I retired, I had taught 46 years. Here in Rockford? Yeah, all around Rockford here. I started out just outside of the city of Rockford, right here on Kishwaukee Street. And then I came into Rockford and taught at two schools in Rockford. And then from there on, I went, I was asked to come down and become a helping teacher in the city of Rockford. I was a teacher who came out, especially with young people who were just starting in, going in and trying to give them ideas of how they might meet problems that came up in their classroom. And you'd give them any kind of ideas and tell them, now here are things that might work. Try, and if it doesn't, try something else. Just to give them a little help along the way. So that's what I did the last ten years of my teaching, which was very difficult. It was the hardest part of my teaching years. You had to put your time in there. And you married Vestelid? Yeah. What was his name? Roland. Roland Vestelid? Mm-hmm. Was he from Sweden? Dalsland. Born in Dalsland. Where in Dalsland? Give me a name. Well, you have many. I'm from Frendefors in Dalsland. What? Frendefors. No. Beckefors. It's a name that everybody knows. Åmål? No, go ahead. Go ahead. Fengsfors? No. Mellerud? Hyggested? Rådandefors? Färglanda? Brolanda. Brolanda. Brolanda. Now it came. Well, it's close to Frendefors where I'm from. Is it really? Yes. Oh. So he came here in the 20s then? In 1909, I think. Oh, 1909? He was young. Young. He was only a little kid too when he came over here. He came with his parents, then? He came to Rockford. Oh. Mm-hmm. So he's about your age, or? Exactly. Exactly our age. We were the same age. Born 1905? Yeah. March, 1905. What day in March? 30th or 31st, whichever it is. Oh. He was a Rolander. He never got back to Sweden. What kind of work was he doing? Engineering. In California. He lived in California. I see. And he moved back then to? No, no. He was married here in Rockford and then went out to Bridgeport when a lot of people from Rockford went out there. Connecticut. And then, yeah, Bridgeport, Connecticut. And then they moved out to California. And so I've only married five years to him. Oh, I see. So you don't have any children then? Oh, no. He had two children. He has two children out there. But we had five very nice years because he was brought up in the same kind of school as I was. So his parents are also interested in? Yes. But they, his father died very young. His father died when he was only 40 years old. I guess he died 1918 or something like that. And the mother had them go into the IOGT movement. So they were IOGT members. He still was. I see. And your parents never joined the? No, they never joined IOGT. Esther did when she married her husband because he was, he belonged. So but I didn't join either out there because I didn't, I saw, I saw what was happening to the group out there and I see what's happening here. People are old. We are all old and we don't want to take on the kind of work that has to be done to keep things going. And the younger people aren't coming in. So you think there will be, it will die off then all this Swedishness after a while or will it be revived again by some other generation you think? I have no idea. Because now it's? Everything. Even the big Vasa movement I think is having wonders of what's going to be coming next unless they can get the young people interested. I often wonder if the era of the need of organizations for socialization is going by the wayside. You think people are tired of each other? No, I don't mean that. I don't mean they don't have the need to get together in groups like we did before. Because we have our own entertainment in our home. We have the means to get out wherever we want to go and we don't like to be bound by I've got to go to meeting night because maybe something else more interesting will come up. I think this has an effect on all of us. I think it's the need. It was the need when the early people came over here of finding some way of helping each other along that brought the growth of these groups. Every organization is suffering from it. I don't mean just the Swedish organizations. You think Shriners, even some of the others, I think from what I can see, might be wondering what's in the future. So the young people don't have the need for it? I don't think they have the need for it. Unless the times change again, you never know. Maybe they are too satisfied people. They are too well fed. Maybe. Now we're talking about a certain group. There are those who are not too well fed, but they're the ones, I don't know how to put it, they're the ones that always have been. But like they say, if we don't have any boots, how can we get a bootstrap to help us get up? There's where our problem is. You see it all the way through. I don't know. Now when you reach the stage where I am, you have to leave it to the young people. And you hope that somewhere along the line, which you know will be some solution to the problems that seem insurmountable to us. The politicians seem to be fumbling too. They do. They do. They do. Maybe we have to work for a little more honesty. A little less greed. So years ago, it always surprises me with the people you talk to. They say they had so many people staying in their house and they kept them over for a while. And now they have maybe 10 or 15 people in the same room. It would be unthinkable today, anybody open up his house for people to stay. It's a different feeling against each other. And nowadays, years ago, we wouldn't have thought of looking for a nursing home for our parents. Somehow or other, it would be taken care of. But now... They pushed them off immediately. Well, you almost have to, because it takes two working people to keep the economy of the family going. And if you have an older person in your home who can't take care of himself, it isn't safe to leave him alone. But in those days, usually, before the World War I, there was a mother and a wife... Mother who was a wife in the home. And if there was an older mother who had to come in, it could be taken care of. But today, and furthermore, as a person of the era now who has to think of what's ahead of you more than you did before, you wouldn't want to harness these kids with your problems. You'd fight that as much as you'd fight going to a rest home. But what can you do? You're caught in the trend and the flow of times. The things that bother me about this is that nursing homes are put up by, shall we say, corporations to make money on investments. And that should not be allowed. That should be stopped. That should be stopped. There is no feeling of love included. There should be, in some way or another, there should be some way with all the taxes we pay that it could go into a fund where homes were built and taken care of so that when you came into that home, you knew that you had paid your duties to society and this was your reward in a way. I feel so strongly about that because we have just gone through seeing a friend of ours who died two weeks ago. In fact, she was the wife of the Jalmer Fricksell I just mentioned. She had used up every penny that she had saved, accepting enough so that she could go on state aid and she died the week before we had to take that move. It's horrible to see friends of yours who have worked every day of their life until they were too old to be hired, then the savings they had go at the rate of $2,000 a month. Now there is something that should be taken care of there. Now there the government is a little bit too weak to handle stuff like that. We have other priorities. Depends upon what your priorities are. End of interview.