 This is cassette two, the continuation with Doris Warne, but also on this cassette will be her husband, Herman Stockville Warne, born 5th of July 1910 in Zanesville, Ohio. He is of English-Welsh-German background. Herman has for many years, 18, been the director of the Arpey Singers Group in Detroit, Michigan. 6th of August 1987. How are the singers doing nowadays? When you came in 18 years ago as a director? Well, we had probably about 30 singers then, but through death we've lost, we're down to 16 members right now. Generally, if we get eight or 10 members at a concert or rehearsal, we're doing well. But we're not the only ones. When we go to American Union of Swedish Singers conventions, we have directors' meetings, and all the choruses are having the same trouble. They can't get young singers in. Most of them say, the young singers say they can't come in because they don't speak Swedish. But that is not a requisite to join. Oh, no, no. In fact, most of the choruses now try and sing at least 50% English and 50% Swedish or Scandinavian. Is it easy for an American to learn the Swedish singing, their part? Not too difficult. I wouldn't think so. I've learned. You had no trouble. But my background is music. And you almost have to be able to read music. And if you can't read music, you can't sing. But if you sing the Swedish, you've got to learn it by rote by just doing it over and over and over and over until you. And but the young singers just don't seem to be interested in coming, you know, coming out of college or out of high school. For years, if we had a Swedish singer, he always brought his sons in. Now we had one man, Brewer Nilsson, who had two sons. And they're still singing with us, even after Brewer Sr. died. I can't think of anybody else that brought their sons in right now. Ivar Anderson had Bud Anderson in. But his son died shortly after he did. Ivar Anderson used to direct the Arpy Swedish Male Chorus, probably 25 years ago. And he died. And he had his son. Bud was a member of the Swedish Male Chorus. He died a few years back. I can't think of anybody else in a family way that brought their sons in to sing with us. But once they get in and learn a few Swedish songs, they enjoy it. Years ago, it seems to, when you walked past the carpenters and bricklayers, construction workers, they were always singing and whistling. You don't hear that today on the work site. Very seldom, very seldom. Even Americanized workers. Why is that? I have no idea why. These young men go to college. They sing in glee clubs and choruses. Even churches are having trouble getting young singers. You go to a church now, and I'd say 75% of the choir are old people. The younger generation just don't seem to be interested in carrying on tradition or whatever you want to call it. So they seem to be going for this electronic stuff. Yeah, they like synthesized music and electronics. What do you think about this synthesized music? I, it's a fad. It'll be gone in another five to 10 years. You think so? Sure. It's too much artificial. A lot of people right today are getting back to culture. They want to hear, like we have our Arpey Swedish Male Chorus concerts. They want to hear old Swedish music. They don't want to hear English music or too much English music. They'd like to hear the old songs. So we try and accommodate them. We do about, I'd say, 2 3rds Swedish or Scandinavian songs. We sing Norwegian, Danish, Finnish, Swedish. And we try and do at least 2 3rds of it in Scandinavian songs every concert. And we put in a 3rd of it in English. And we're still trying to carry on tradition. Even though I'm not Swedish, I'm still trying to help. How about the Finnish version of it now? Do you have Finns with you? They have a Finnish chorus called Finlandia here in Detroit. They too are having trouble getting members, although their membership runs, I'd say, probably anywhere from 16 to 20. But they used to be a big chorus too. They used to have 30 to 40 singers in their chorus. How many performances do you have then? We put on a concert in the fall and one in the spring. In Detroit? In Detroit. At the concert hall or? Well, so far we've been renting the Finnish hall for our concerts. But they've revamped our Swedish club, rebuilt it, and extended the size of it. I think possibly we can have our concerts in our own club now. And we get, oh, probably anywhere, what would you say, Doris? 50, 75 people at a concert? Yeah. You sell tickets then? Oh, yeah. Sell tickets and have a little smorgas after the concert. Do you go outside Detroit also? We have on occasions, yeah, gone out. Last year we went down to Ypsilanti and sang a little concert down there. We used to go to, once or twice a year, go to the Finnish club and sing a concert for their, what they called, fin fest? For their fin fest. And they have a couple of Finnish clubs outside of Detroit like we have the Swedish club here. One at Loon Lake and what's the other one? Kaleva Park. Oh, yeah, Kaleva Park. And we used to go out and sing every summer for them, but we can't get enough men to do it in the summertime anymore. How about next year when the King and Queen is coming? Well, we'll put on a concert. Will it be staged by the Swedish council then? Oh, yes, yes, definitely. And then they will have you as a? As one of the entertainments. So you are practicing for that? Oh, yeah. How many times are you rehearsing then? Not every week. So far we've been rehearsing every Tuesday night. So you have to? Except in the summer. In the summer. You go down then to Detroit? Yes. The Swedish club is at Nine Mile and Grand River. And we rehearse down there. That Swedish club now, is that owned by more than one organization? No, just Swedish. And what do they have on their programs? Well, they have breakfast there and different kinds of food occasions. What would you say, Doris? They have herring breakfast. Herring breakfast. Sunday of the month. And pancake breakfasts and different organizations, Swedish organizations come in there and use the hall. Before I forget, you mentioned something about the costume. Yes. From Sweden. The costume that I have came from Jerusalem. A very dear friend of mine by the name of David Whiting, whose family owned the American Colony Hotel in Jerusalem, sent me this costume. It was the last thing that was left of the group that came from Dalarna that went down to Jerusalem when they thought the world was coming to an end. And they were the domestic help in the American Colony Hotel. So it was David's grandmother that Selma Lagerlief wrote her book, My Jerusalem, about. And David felt that he wanted this costume kept and that it would go to somebody who would appreciate it. So I have it here, and it was sent to me from Jerusalem. So you have had that at certain occasions? Oh, yes. I wear it quite often. And it's a costume from Dalarna? Yes. It's from Nås. Nås? Well, it was Nås, of course. Yeah. So it's an old one. Oh, yes. It sure is. It goes back quite a few years. It might soon be over 100 years. Oh, I'm sure it's that old. Is it still keeping up, though? Yes. And it's amazing the dyes, how the cotton material was dyed, how vibrant the colors are, and how they have held up. And this David, how did you get in contact with him? Or was he from Detroit? David's father was the American ambassador to Jerusalem. And David went to school here. He went to- So he was of the Sweden? No. He was of the Sweden. He was of the Sweden. And he was a teacher? He was a teacher. And he went to- So he was of the Sweden? No. He was not of Sweden. He was English. And David came over here, and he married over here and lived. And then David at one time lived here in Metamora, which is real, real close to us. David was a stonecutter. He had to go back to Jerusalem, so he went back over there. And one of the things that he sent back to me was this Swedish costume. The last woman that was left, I think she was in her late 80s or in her 90s, and this costume had belonged to her mother, who had come down on the boat from Dallina. And she wanted it to be preserved, so David sent it to me. So that's much more than over 100 years old. Oh, yes, it would have to be. Uh-huh. So you have it in your possession? Yes, I have that here. You also have a lot of other things. Oh, yes. How did you start, Otto? You are also an artist. You're all right. You decorate ducks and ducklings and gooses and geeses and whatever it is. How did you get started with that? You started with it in the 80s, Otto, to do that. Oh, I've done this all my life. I have either done knitting or crocheting or needlepoint or something all my life because my mother taught me. My mother was a seamstress in Sweden. She did tailoring, so I learned an awful lot of it from her. And I am very interested in cultural things from all nationalities. And then you also collect antiques? Yes. What's the type of Swedish painting you do? Decorative painting. Decorative painting that comes from Dallina. Oh, yes, I see. Have you studied that? No, all I have done is what I have read in books and what people have taught me that have come over from Sweden. And I do the Swedish straw craft, which I have gotten books from. As a matter of fact, Ellen, Florence's daughter, just brought me a beautiful book from Sweden last week on hemsled. So you like to keep busy? Oh, yes. And your husband, he has to be the supplier of the raw material? He sings to me. Oh, he sings to this? Yeah, he sings to me. So it makes the day very easy on you. Relax and work. But the young generation, how about your daughter? Is she interested in doing the same thing? Oh, she's too busy at her job. She hasn't got time for things like that. She said, Mother, when Christmas time comes, you bring the limpa, you make the Swedish meatballs, you bring the pickled herring and the peppercocker and the spritz. She said, you make them and bring them. And Mother will do it? And Mother will do it. Is there a common line about other people too? You think young people have been spritzing? All of them do that. All of them do that. And I have my mother's Swedish cookbook that she got when she was about 16, but I can't read it. But Gunn Stoll, who lives over here on the next street, comes over and she'll read it for me, and she'll tell me what it is and we'll translate it. And you'll whip it up? Yeah, and then we whip it up. Our club that we belong to here, I think the first probably 15 years, the minutes from the meeting were written in Swedish. And Florence Johnson, one of our members, translated all the minutes into English so that we would have them. And she has been the secretary for many, many years? Yeah. She's been secretary, what, about 15 years, 14, 15 years? Yeah. Who was the secretary before her? Penny Morton. And Lillian Lagerquist was secretary at one time, and Art Berg's father, Simon, I think was the first secretary we had. So there's been quite a few. But Florence Johnson, she is bilingual? Yeah. All Swedish anyway. And does it beautifully. But she really kept her Swedish. Why is that? Because she was born here. Yeah. I don't know. It's interesting that your parents spoke Swedish all the time. Yeah, that's very possible. Well, her daughter Ellen is studying Swedish now. And she is very, very interested in it. And she's been in Sweden, I think, three times. And Ellen lives in California, and she has a Swedish teacher out there that she's been studying with for about three years. She speaks and writes and reads Swedish fluently. Well, she also majors in foreign languages. In the high school where she teaches out there, outside of the foreign language department. She's a teacher? Yes. She's a high school teacher. And her specialty is foreign languages. And her children then went on to Sweden? Yes. They went over because they wanted to see the house that their grandfather was born in. But now, most of the young children up here dance Sádis, and they do the hambu. And they do quite a few of the Swedish dances. And they try to teach them when they are very, very young, Hej, tömte gubbar, and things of that type, and the dances that go along with it. So they are trying to hold on to the ethnic background. You don't have a Christmas party here because it's too cold? No, it's too cold. But we have a Lucia that comes around on the 13th. Is it the 12th or the 13th? Yeah. Who is, who do you elect then? Karen Pearson does it almost every year. She puts her crown on and her white dress and her red sash, and goes from house to house and sings. She brings coffee and buns to her? Yeah. She brings buns. I see. But she can't, you have your own coffee. So every year? Yeah, every year Karen does that. She comes early in the morning? Yeah, not quite as early as she does in her own house. She waits a little bit until she thinks somebody is up. At least the lights are on. I see. So then she comes over. How about Midsummer, is that the celebrated, this one you have the picnic? Oh yeah, we used to do an awful lot. But you don't have it in April? Yeah, they don't have it now. They don't have it now? Uh-uh. They've gotten away from that, I would say, in probably the last seven or eight years. But we always had one before. Before. And we made Swedish costumes for all the little children and the women, and they danced around the pole, and Arpy usually came out and sang. But I have been told that things are very different nowadays than they were in the days when my daughter was growing up here. Now it takes both a man and a wife working to keep a family going, whereas when my daughter was growing up, your job was to stay home and raise the family and take care of the house. Well, the man probably felt inferior if the wife had to go to work 50 years ago. Yeah. Because as soon as they marry, they stay home. Yeah. But nowadays, if they can't work, they get... Yeah? They feel they are bypassed. Oh, yeah. Most of the girls up here work, and the children, I don't know what happens to the children. We'll find out in another 25 years. Yes, we'll find out in another 25 years. Then we will have the answers. Do you have some reason as to why there aren't that many Swedes coming over here now? Well, it's the quota, you know. I mean, it's hard to get a visa for it. Oh, it is? There's unemployment in this country. Oh. They don't let anybody in unless they have a special reason for a job. Well, that amazes me. And they probably have it quite good in Sweden. They don't want to leave. I've heard that. So much security. Yeah. And that's probably one reason why people like to be secured. Yeah. Whatever that means, I don't know. Yeah. He always used to kid my mother about being from Småland. She called them the Scandinavian hillbillies. And he said, you know, he said, they're so dumb down there in Småland that they went to call on somebody. I don't know who it was. But anyway, we went to call on somebody. And the man excused himself and went over to the drawer and opened the drawer and took out a cigar and lit it. He said, Nå du har fin fram under det ska vrika. He didn't offer anybody else a cigar. He just took it and smoked himself. When you have a special company, you smoke a cigar. Did you notice that, have you noticed over the years now the different nationalities here? You have, from Dalarna for instance, one group, and you had the Limburgs, they were from Nordmalinga up in Västerbotten. Yeah. And then you had Smålandingar of course. Yeah. Did you notice any, they were kidding each other? Oh yeah, the ones from Skåne. Oh, you had Skåningar here? Yeah. Oh yeah. And they used to try and mimic them with that guttural sound that you get from the skåning. And they used to tease them about that. But then now we had, Martha Nordén came from Kirna up in Lapland. And... Where was Sven from? He was from Gävle. No, he was from Ulio. Ulio. Ulio, Ulio. He was from Ulio. This little town of Lappier is, you know, it's just this stinking little town. Nobody has ever heard of Lappier. And Sven's nephew was coming from Ulio. And he got on the plane in Stockholm. And this young man came in and sat down next to him. And I guess he was from Stockholm. And this other kid was from Ulio. And he sat down on the plane all the way over to the United States. And they got to talking and everything. And he said, where are you going in the United States? He says, I'm going to Michigan. He said, oh, isn't that funny? I'm going to Michigan too. He said, where are you going in Michigan? To Detroit. And he said, oh no, but I go into Detroit. But my uncle is going to pick me up at the airport. And the other kid says, oh, that's funny. My uncle is going to pick me up at the airport too. And he said, then we're going to a small town that nobody has ever heard of, Lappier. And the kid says, gee, that's funny because my uncle is coming to pick me up and we're going to Lappier. And it was Sven Johnson's nephew from Ulio. And what's the guy's name, Larson, that owned the furniture store in Lappier, who was Swedish, was picking up his nephew and coming all the way from Stockholm to Lappier? I mean, that is really strange. But that was so funny when he said, well, I'm going to Lappier too. So there are some Swedish store owners that have been in Lappier over the years. Yeah, there have been. Now, both the Larsons are dead now. But they had a furniture store. And we have a very good friend who is, what, vice president of the bank here? Yeah. Swedish. That would be an interesting person to talk to. Yeah. Magnuson. He lives in Lappier? Yeah, he's the president of the bank. First. Yeah. And I was talking to him not so very long ago, and I guess, was it his mother or her mother that died over in Sweden? And they were running back and forth trying to settle the estate. One of them, I don't know. Yeah. Magnuson. He's in the bank in town. Easier to tell you than it is to tell me. No, he works in the bank. Still active. Yeah. He and his wife. And then there's, what is the guy's name that has some kind of a car dealership here in Lappier that is? Peterson? Maybe it is Peterson. I don't know which one it is. But they're very, very active in the engineering society or the Swedish council in Detroit. They're real elegant people. I don't know who that would be. Well, Pete seemed to know who he was. I can't imagine. Yeah. Well, Magnuson would know who he was. Oh, yeah. Yeah. So the people selling this place now and living here are mostly from Detroit? Well, from all over. Flint. California, Flint, Pontiac. Well, they originally been in Detroit a little bit. Yeah, most of them originally came from the Detroit area. You don't get any from Cadillac in Greenhaven? Oh, no. No, no. Uh-uh. We get, then there was quite a few that came over from Flint. Because it's a close by. Yeah, because it's close by. But there's an awful lot of people that are members here that come from up north. Now, like May's from Ontonagon. Yes. And Esther is from someplace up there. Same place almost. Yeah. And Gladys was born someplace up in northern Michigan. Norway, Michigan, I believe. Huh? Norway, Michigan. Could be. And who else is from northern Michigan, huh? Birgit's husband, Julian, is from up there. Very few of the younger people up here that even speak Swedish. They don't understand it either. Oh, they can understand it, but it's a struggle when you have to talk to somebody that's from Sweden. They laugh at you. Dysprokresvenskar, just some in Born. Oh. Yeah, some in Litenborn. And that's the way it is, because you think in English and speak in Swedish. You have to translate it in your head. And there's very little of it going on. Is it mostly women living in all the men, or what is the ratio? They seem to survive the men. Oh, yeah. For a few years. Oh, I don't know. We've got Fritz Burke. Fritz Burke. And you've got Eddie, and you've got Carl Johnson. Yeah. And then Hjalmar just passed away. He was alone here for a good many years. And Anton Johnson was alone here. And Willie Hanson. What are you talking about? All these women are dying out. They die. Yeah, but then you have – we have very few divorces up here. There's only one that I can remember of. I can't even remember of any. I know that, Lukey and Pat. Oh, yeah. That was about the only one. And then Alice Auger, two of them. So they kept the commandments then, whatever the domination was. Yeah. There seem to be very, very few divorces in the Swedish families that I know of. Well, it's unusual in all these 1987 that anybody keep the commandments. I mean, they don't steal from each other. You can leave things out there and you can pick it up. Sure. And you can not even have the lock. So everybody helped each other. Did you get a chance to talk to Jacobson? Yes, I did. He's a very interesting man. He's still working, though, isn't he? Well, semi-retired. Semi. Yeah. And his wife is of French background. Yeah, June Lapeer. Yeah, that's what I understand. Very familiar to the city up here, to the town. So she probably had a rough time the first year to come into the community. That is not easy, though, because the Swedes are a little bit apprehensive. Oh, yeah. You got to tell your first, you know, before they are approving or something. I know that. And they are domineering. The Swedes? Yeah. Very domineering. When you come up here, they let you know that if you're not a Swede, after you've been here a year, you're going to become one. So you have to adapt to the ideas. Yeah. Yeah, but when the board of directors change, can't they be a little bit more lenient every generation? There's always one of the older ones that are on there that lets you know that you're a Swede. Like Edward. He's not on the board anymore. He's never been on the board. Pina? But... No, I was treasurer here for 20 years, and I always had the feeling that I was never fully accepted, because I wasn't Swedish, but my bookkeeping and all that kept the club in good stead. And they appreciated that. I always felt that they kind of let me know in a roundabout way that I wasn't Swedish, but they still accepted me. They tolerated you. They tolerated me. Yeah. In other words, you did a good job, and they had to appreciate that. Yeah. Because being the treasurer is not the easiest. No. Do you have to do the collecting too, then? Oh, yeah. From each member? Yes. Well, you were like a sheriff then. Made all the collections and paid all the... Presented the summons. Yeah. Made all the collections, paid all the bills. Well, I'll tell you, I don't know of a family up here that doesn't have lutefisk at Christmas time, and if you're... I don't care what you are, you have lutefisk. And they learned to cook the Swedish foods and eat the Swedish foods. As long as there's one Swede in the family, the whole family is Swedish. So they seem to be the domineering... Yeah, very much so. Yeah, but how about your husband? Doesn't he try to introduce something of his background in making a food, for instance, a custom? No. No? It was impossible. It was impossible, it's right. But he looks healthy, though, so he hasn't lost out on it. He does real, real well. He never objects to my cooking. Matter of fact, he told me once that I was a better cook than his mother. So he... he trained you pretty good then, when he married you. Yeah. But it is important, of course, when you are living in the area, like that... Yeah. You've got to be approved, because you've got to live with them, year after year after year. Yeah. And how about politics now? Politics? How does that come into the picture? Well, I suppose you talk about what's in the paper and so on. Have they been Republicans or Democrats, the Swedes that have been settling here? The majority of your older people that were born in Sweden were Democrats. And they kept that order? And they kept it, most of them, although we have... the ones that have gone into where they have owned their own businesses and things like that, eventually end up being Republicans. But most of them that come over from Sweden now, like Otz, are Democrats. Art Berg next door is a Democrat. We're Democrats. We've got Fabricius that are down here. They're Democrats. Now, I don't know about Ellen, but I think both Otz and Florence were Democrats. Pete, I don't think Pete has ever voted, but I know his children are Republicans. That is from Mary's side of the family. I see. Now, Gladys, of course, who is strictly American, is Republican. I don't know what Eric was, but you'll find that most of the older Swedes were Democrats, because I think it was the nearest thing to socialism of which they had so much of in Sweden. But then the ones that got into enterprising ventures, they became Republicans. Yeah, it seemed that way. Was that a show-off or a difference? Oh, I don't know. I think maybe it's because they got into management. And, of course, management is death against labor. And where labor is usually Democratic and your management is usually Republican. And then they can also smoke the cigar. Yeah, then they can smoke, yeah. Then they do have fun on the day. And the Democrats, they use the snuff for the tobacco. Yeah, they chew the tobacco and snuff. But I have found that practically all of your people that came over... Now, everyone in Montana is a Republican. I don't know why. Your father, for instance, was he a Republican? No, he was a Democrat. He was a dyed-in-the-wool Democrat. He was. But I know Russell Bobrywick, who is from Montana, is Republican. And Shirley Hagan, whose family came from Montana, were Republicans. But, of course, they stayed there a lot longer. My dad came into Detroit and got into the Union as soon as the Union came in. And nobody was going to tell him what he was going to be. He was a Democrat. That was it. Period. But when the discussion over here, how did they have any political discussions? They don't discuss politics and they don't discuss religion. So that's a no-no? I don't know. It just never comes up. Does it say so in the bylaws? No. No. No. It's just something that we never discuss. I got a winner. What? On Zingo. Oh, fine. I got to mail it in. Fine. Right away. But most of these younger people... Well, of course, I think that Margo's was a hangover from her father. And her husband is also a Democrat, then. I imagine. They always seem... they're always yelling when... It comes out when you have a presidential election. They're either for one or for the other. And that's usually when it comes out. They may put a sticker on the car or something like that, and you'll get... But you very seldom... Now, I couldn't tell you what Jacobson is. I couldn't tell you what books are. I couldn't tell you... I think both May and Esther are... I think they're Democrats. I don't know. But you don't see any signs here in the city voting for him? Oh, no. No. So nobody comes in and... No. No. They all go to vote, and you never know what they're going to vote. But you can usually tell they lean one way or another. So most of the Swedes, then, were Democrats. Yeah, I think most of them were. Because it's the nearest thing to socialism. And that was... Isn't that what most of them are in Sweden? Yes, because they are in Rådning Pari. Yeah. There were no socialists here in Detroit, or they had a party? No. A club or anything like that? No. Do you remember Olli Skrattur? Oh, God, yes. I have some of his records around here someplace. So you remember him? Oh, I remember Olli Skrattur. He came to the... He was never up here, though. No. But he came to the Danish Hall. Yeah. And he had a theatrical display, an ensemble he had with him. Yeah. And then people were laughing and... Oh, yeah....had a good time. But it was only in Swedish. Yeah, that was all in Swedish. Never in English? Never in English. And... Could you enjoy his program, though? I mean, you understood it? Oh, yes, I understood it. And Freddy Nordin, every time he went to Sweden, he would come back with these records. What was the one he had? Ja, jitt till den born dop, ja jitt för jag är visst, det bornet det var mitt. He'd bring these records back, and we would laugh at them. These semi-pornographic records he would bring back from Sweden. And they'd pass them around from house to house. Oh, ja, Art de Burg, he remembers him quite well. Ja. I'm surprised that Art can, because Art is... Oh, he's much younger. He's much younger. I think Art has just heard so much about it, that you hear about it so much that you remember it. It could be that it was repeated all the time. Because his father used to play the harmonica. And he used to sing an awful lot of songs, too, that they would probably remember from that. And then he has a lot of records that he plays off and on. When he gets drunk. You can always tell when he's under his cups. Because then he plays the Swedish records so loud that you can hear it all over the place. That's his symphony. In the evening. Ja. One thing I have found is that the Swedish people seem to be very heavy drinkers. Some of them, and some of them are so... But the young people didn't take after him. Not all of them, but some of them have. Did the older generation tell you, for instance, not to drink and not to smoke or anything like that? It was there. I can remember getting bawled out because my mother used to have great big parties on Christmas Day. And they had glug. And everybody had leaved their cups laying around. And I'd eat the raisins and the almonds out of the bottom of it. I'm sitting under the piano laughing. I don't think I could have been any more than seven or eight years old. My mother couldn't understand what had happened, but I had eaten all the raisins and the almonds out of the glug cups. But I have found that Swedish people do a tremendous amount of drinking. And they would go the same for the Finns too, though? I don't know anything about the Finns. I've never been around Norwegians, Danish or Finns. The Danish people, when they were drinking, they were doing it a different way, though. They were more happy and relaxed. The Swedes usually drink too much and get too aggressive. Yeah, they get very aggressive, but not half as much as the Finns do. And the Finns carry knives in their socks. Oh, you remember that? Oh, I remember that. There was a street in Detroit called Woodrow Wilson. And that's where all the Finns and all the Swedes lived. And they had a nightclub over there that was called the Copper Club. And you could always tell, they all had these knives on the inside of their socks. Anyone that I have ever come in contact with have carried knives. So it was like a custom, then, that they carried on. I think it was the Swedes that did that. Although I had a Swede demonstrate how the Finns use a knife on you. Eric Eliason across the street was showing me one time how the Finns used the knives. And he says, they don't take, they don't slice with the whole blade. They just take a little bit on the end of it like this. And they hold it on there and they stick you in the ass with it. And he stuck me in the fanny with the end of that blade. And I had blood all down my leg. He said, oh, I didn't mean to do that. I just was trying to show you. So you had the... Yeah, he says they just take the end of the blade like that and they slit you with it. Like the colored people take a razor blade and cut you. To mark you off. Yeah. Yeah. But he took the blade and stuck it right in my face. So there were probably fights then. Oh, listen, they used to have fights. But you didn't have anything out here though. Oh, God, we had fights every Saturday night out here. Yeah, but who was taking care of the... Her father. My father. He was the sheriff. Yeah, he was the sheriff. And he'd break up the fights. Oh, they'd have... Was he a strong guy, your father? Oh, yeah. He was as big as I am. Yeah. I see, so he was a tall... And they had... They used to have soccer games out here. Well, you had a soccer field in here. Yeah, out here. They used to play soccer out here. The Finns against the Swedes. And then the Finns would get a few drinks in them and they'd get into the pavilion and they'd make a pass at one of the Swedes' girlfriends and then there'd be a fight. And it was all because they drank too much. So, what did he do with them then, your father? He was not afraid to break it up or... Oh, they would just break them up and tell them to go home. Go out and get in your car and go home. So he didn't hold them away until they'd be in jail or... No, no, no. No. No, he just kept them... So there was a weekly occurrence then? Oh, yeah. There were fights out here all the time. Oh, they would pass out under these trees. What I can remember during the Depression, that when we were up there in that tent, I just lay there waiting for the sun to come up, because the minute the sun came up on Sunday morning, you were out of that tent and down under the trees, because these guys would get drunk and maybe a nickel or a couple pennies would fall out of their pockets. And you'd go from tree to tree looking for these pennies and these nickels. And that was all the money you had. And you knew darn well that when they got drunk and passed out under the trees down here, that maybe a little bit of change would fall out of their pockets. So there was a good omen that we would wait for. Yeah, so you'd go down early on Sunday morning to see if you could find any change. And those people now were not married, were they? They were yard bachelors. Most of them, were they married people too? Oh, some of them were just newlyweds. And some of them were the bunch that lived down here in the bachelor's cottage. So there was a rowdy place over there? Oh, that was a rowdy place. That's where all the bachelors lived. So no girls came over there? Oh, yes, there were plenty of girls went down there. There were always girls in and out of there. The girls did the cleaning and the cooking. Oh, I see. They had... Yeah. So... Super mates. Yeah, that was the bachelor's club. And then when the last bachelor got married, they gave it back to the club. Oh. So they paid a special club admission on their end or... Well, they had a membership someplace else. Of their own? Of their own, just a vacant lot. That was their membership, but they were down in the bachelor's club. They built it and they kept it up. How many were living there and who stayed there? Oh, I imagine there was probably eight or nine of them. Harold Bridenburg was one of them. Oh, he was one? Yeah. Oh, he married late? Yeah. Well, his first wife died of childbirth. Yeah, he was married twice, I think. Yeah. Oh. Now, you see, where else in the world, unless it was your family, would you know this much about people? That's right. It's unusual. Because they all spread out. Yeah. It's just like one great big family. You know everybody's life history. Yeah. And they're all different. Yeah, and they're all different. And you were never in their home in town. But it's strange. Isn't that unusual? It is. It's very, very different. Yeah. But you are so concentrated here, I suppose, and you are looking for news about this, the well-being of the next door neighbor. Yeah. And when they get sick, of course, the rumor spreads immediately when somebody gets sick. Yeah. But do you visit them then in the hospital? Oh, yes. And if there is a funeral, do you all go then if you can? Oh, yes, everybody goes. Everybody from the club goes to the cemetery. Where are they buried now, the people from here? All over. All over. All over. There's no special place. No. Pete is, Izzy is the first one to be buried here in Lapeer. In the Lapeer Cemetery? Yeah. I see. And he would also probably be buried here. Yeah. He bought two plots. Now, my mother and dad are buried at Whitechapel, which practically... In Detroit? Yeah. Well, it's right... On 75. It's on 75. It's in Bloomfield Hill. But practically everybody up here where they have passed away are at Whitechapel. So they have bought the grave plots there. Yeah. Most of them are from up here. Practically all of them are buried at Whitechapel. So that's a final resting place. Yeah. No Union News to play and no more board of directors meetings. No. No more board of directors meetings. There's an interesting history, though, about this place. Yeah. They've seen people coming from bad times in the 20s and 30s. Yeah. And they made a living of it. They sure did. So now it's the hope for the young generation to take over and carry on. Yeah. Well, thank goodness there's as much of it that's done as it is because, you see, they don't... You don't appreciate something when it's handed to you on a platter. Do they understand the hardship you're having because you have a grub new land. There is no question about it. They'll fill in the layers and roll them off. Karen says, we'll have five minutes silence while my mother speaks of the Depression. I'll say something and start to talk about something, she'll say, oh, my God, we'll have five minutes of silence while my mother tells of the Depression. It's hard to explain, though, for the young... Yeah, well, it's just a big joke to them. They just can't... they can't comprehend any part of it. It's hard to understand when you read his diary. We thought job for three years. And going down painting the cars at 25 cents a top. And like you said, one day maybe 75 cents. And your mother still had to have the food on the table. Oh, I can remember. She had a wicker cart that was on two wheels and it had a round handle at the top. My daughter has it in her kitchen now. And during the Depression, the Ford Motor Company had what they call a salvage department. Down on Victor, I imagine it was about seven blocks from our house. And my mother used to pull this cart down and she could buy cantaloupe for a penny a piece. And she would bring that home. And that might be all we'd have to eat for the day. I can remember there was a time that if anybody said cantaloupe to me, I'd die. I couldn't look at another cantaloupe because we had so much of it. But you were able to survive on that. Yeah, we were. And every now and then you'd... She might just possibly, if they had a sale, when you could buy hamburger at 15 cents a pound. And then she'd get a loaf of day-old bread for a penny. And your hamburger that you had was half bread and maybe three-quarters bread and one-quarter hamburger. But I can remember that. It was probably a rough time. It was. Was there a depression in Sweden? Yes. There would have had to have been. Yes, there was. I imagine that they could probably cope with it better than we could over here. Well, it was a smaller unit of people, of course, the same kind of people. But here you had so many of them. Well, this is a melting pot. Everything you had over here, it... Well, they probably had a bit more governmental control over it. Yeah. Especially when you get sick, you could always get some repair job done. Which part was the most difficult to construct here at the cantaloupe? Was it rolling for the lip and cut, when your driver is gone, or was it... Dirt roads. It was dirt roads. Was it the most expensive or was taking care of the land more expensive? To clean the lake? Oh, I think clearing out. Clearing out? And cutting trees down and dividing. But they were done by each member by hand? Yeah, all of them together. But at Rønna you had to buy a lot of loads of gravel. Oh, yes, you had gravel. But it was years that we just drove on mud. With the cars too? With the cars too. And then building the bridge. They built the bridge and they built the pavilion. And they used to build all their own boats. They used to make their boats and their oars and everything. And they had a repair, I mean, shop up here then, or they built them in Detroit? No, they built them up in their houses. Outside, all around the pavilion, they built them in the summer. And then they bring some material from Detroit? They got a lot of it in Lapeer from cutting lumber, which is no longer there, but that's where they used to get a lot of it. And then what kind of fish was in the lake at that time? Because there was like swamps all around then. Oh, yeah, there was... Carps? No carp. No carp. We didn't have carp at that time. Carp came in later. Who planted them in then? That came in from Flint. Well, you mean you have a connection then with the... Oh, yes, we have a... Well, see, we're on an island. There's water all around us. There is? Yeah. That creek comes back out over here and goes into the lake. So the carp came through the creek? Yeah, it came through the creek. Oh, the creek. We had bluegills and perch and... Bass. Bass and pike. Yeah. Pike too? Oh, big pike. But we have restocked this lake a couple, three times. Yeah. And cleaned out all the carps and then... No, we did that once. Once? Yeah, once they cleared all the carp out of the lake. How did you get in them? Well, they came in with an airplane and dropped some kind of chemicals in the lake. And all the carp raised to the top of the surface. Well, all the fish then came to the top? Yeah. And we salvaged this fish that were good fish, put the carp in a manure spreader and took it down and dumped it on the land down here. Yeah, in the dump area. And they all came up then dead from this spreader? Yeah. Oh, we were out there in rowboats, we had rowboats like this full of carp. Yeah, pretty big. Yeah, with great big pitchforks, taking this carp out. Yeah, I think we got three manure spreaders full of carp. And then you... The farmer took them up here and... Plowed them under. Plowed them under. Yeah. That's rich land up there. That's right. Yeah, that's why Al had such a good garden. Yeah. You get all that you don't need. But this lake is fed from a stream that comes down from over to the southwest of here, and it splits over here, and part of it goes around that way and part of it comes into the lake, and then it flows out of the lake into this other lake over here, and then out into the Flint River. So that's where the carp came in, down the creek. So there's the history of the lake. And then you also brought in a lot of sand for the beach? Yeah. We put that on top of the ice. Oh, I see. Yeah, you put all the sand on the top of the ice, and then when the ice melts, the sand just falls down. And there's the... we stood erosion or anything? Yeah, in the same place. Yeah. Well, you've got a beautiful beach. Yeah. And a beautiful sunset. Yeah. Oh, yes. Oh, yes. You've got the best of all. Yeah. Eric Eliason over here used to say, that's the most beautiful thing up here is to go out and watch the sunset. Oh. Yeah, you're that. Terry Harrington, Florence's, Florence Johnson's son-in-law, is a musician. He's out in California. And he's a very, very well-known musician. And when he comes up here, he takes a rowboat out, just as the sun is going down, and sits out there in the middle of the lake and plays his flute. And it is the most gorgeous thing you have ever in your life heard. He goes out in the rowboat in the middle of the lake by himself and plays his flute as the sun is going down. And you can hear him because they're on the water so much. Oh, yes. You can hear him all over. Everything is so quiet here. Yeah, it's so quiet here you can hear the grass grow. Yeah.